WHO-convened Global Study of Origins of SARS-CoV-2:
China Part
Joint WHO-China Study
14 January-10 February 2021
Joint Report

1

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ARI
cDNA
China CDC
CNCB
CoV
Ct values
DDBJ
EMBL-EBI
FAO
GISAID
GOARN
Hong Kong SAR
Huanan market
IHR
ILI
INSD
MERS
MRCA
NAT
NCBI
NMDC
NNDRS
OIE
PCR
PHEIC
RT-PCR
SARI
SARS-CoV-2
SARSr-CoV-2
tMRCA
WHO
WIV

acute respiratory illness
complementary DNA
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
China National Center for Bioinformation
coronavirus
cycle threshold values
DNA Database of Japan
European Molecular Biology Laboratory and European Bioinformatics
Institute
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Database
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market
International Health Regulations (2005)
influenza-like illness
International Nucleotide Sequence Database
Middle East respiratory syndrome
most recent common ancestor
nucleic acid testing
National Center for Biotechnology Information
National Microbiology Data Center
National Notifiable Disease Reporting System
World Organisation for Animal Health (Office international des Epizooties)
polymerase chain reaction
public health emergency of international concern
real-time polymerase chain reaction
severe acute respiratory illness
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2-related virus
time to most recent common ancestor
World Health Organization
Wuhan Institute of Virology

2

Acknowledgements

WHO gratefully acknowledges the work of the joint team, including Chinese and international scientists
and WHO experts who worked on the technical sections of this report, and those who worked on studies
to prepare data and information for the joint mission. In addition, many health officials, animal,
environmental and public health experts from Wuhan, Hubei Province and across China worked with
the joint team on the origins studies, and their contributions are reflected in the report. The interpretation
and translation teams, led by Fu Xijuan, provided crucial simultaneous and consecutive interpretation
for plenary meetings of the joint team and for working groups; supported site visits and interviews; and
provided rapid translation of working documents, presentations, reports and key documents to support
the work of the joint team.
WHO also gratefully acknowledges the technical, administrative and logistics support of many agencies
and offices in the preparations and conduct of the joint mission. Staff at WHO Country Office in Beijing
and at WHO Headquarters worked closely with Chinese counterparts and colleagues and with partner
organizations and agencies on detailed practical arrangements and logistics and provided staff to
support the joint mission. Further, the WHO rapid review team and OIE provided a database of relevant
literature on SARS-CoV-2 potential origins to complement the technical working groups during the
joint study.
WHO acknowledges the contributions of many people, but in particular (in alphabetical order) Chen
Zhongdan, Gauden Galea (WHO Representative), C-K Lee, Qiao Jianrong, Danny Sheath, Paige
Snider, Sun Jiani, Khristeen Umali Dalangin, as well as Xu Huabing, Pang Xinxin, Liu Xijuan and the
administrative team at the WHO country office in China.
The reports of plenary and working group meetings, and of site visits were prepared by David
FitzSimons (who also edited the report), Sun Jiani and Lisa Scheuermann.
We gratefully acknowledge the following experts for their invaluable contributions during this joint
study: Prof. HUANG Fei (Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Prof. LIU Jiangmei
(Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Prof. HAN Jingxiu (Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention), Prof. XU Chunyu (Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Prof.
GENG Mengjie (Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Prof. HU Yuehua (Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention); Dr. WU Yang (Hubei Provincial Center for Disease
Control and Prevention), Dr. CHEN Qi (Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention),
Dr. LIU Manman (Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Dr. ZHOU Mengge
(Hubei Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Dr. MENG Pai (Wuhan Prefecture
Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Dr. ZHAO Yuanyuan (Wuhan Prefecture Center for
Disease Control and Prevention), Dr. WANG Dashuai (Wuhan Prefecture Center for Disease Control
and Prevention), Dr. ZHANG Jiajing (Wuhan Prefecture Center for Disease Control and Prevention),
Prof. WANG Linghang (Beijing Ditan Hospital), Prof. WU Wenjuan (Jinyintan Hospital) Prof. XU Lei
(Tsinghua University), Prof. JIA Zhiyuan (National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention,
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention), Prof. WU Zhiqiang (Institute of Pathogen Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College), Dr.), Dr. HE Xiaozhou
(National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention), Prof. NI Jianqiang (China Animal Disease Control Center), Prof. JIANG Jingkun (School
of Environment, Tsinghua University), ;Prof. LI Dong (Wuhan Animal Disease Control Center), Prof.
Ming-Kun Li (China National Center For Bioinformation), Prof. Hua Chen (China National Center for
Bioinformation), Prof. Jian Lu (Peking University).

3

4

Contents
SUMMARY ...................................................................................................................................... 6
BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................................... 9
MEMBERS OF THE JOINT INTERNATIONAL TEAM AND METHODS OF WORK ................ 12
MAIN FINDINGS........................................................................................................................... 16
EPIDEMIOLOGY ........................................................................................................................... 16
Surveillance data – morbidity ...................................................................................................... 16
Surveillance data – mortality ....................................................................................................... 30
Review of Stored Biological Samples Testing ............................................................................. 50
Summary and recommendations .................................................................................................. 53
References .................................................................................................................................. 56
MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGY .................................................................................................. 58
Background on molecular epidemiology ...................................................................................... 58
Approach .................................................................................................................................... 61
Overview of global databases of SARS-CoV-2 ............................................................................ 61
Overview of the sequences of early cases, global overview .......................................................... 67
Zoonotic origins of SARS-CoV-2 ................................................................................................ 82
Genomic sequencing data of SARS-CoV-2 viruses in naturally infected animals ......................... 85
Summaries and perspectives ........................................................................................................ 87
References .................................................................................................................................. 88
ANIMAL AND ENVIRONMENT STUDIES ................................................................................. 92
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 92
Methods ...................................................................................................................................... 93
Results ........................................................................................................................................ 94
Conclusions .............................................................................................................................. 108
Recommendations ..................................................................................................................... 109
References ................................................................................................................................ 110
POSSIBLE PATHWAYS OF EMERGENCE................................................................................ 111
Direct zoonotic transmission ..................................................................................................... 112
Introduction through intermediate host followed by zoonotic transmission ................................. 114
Introduction through the cold/food chain ................................................................................... 116
Introduction through a laboratory incident ................................................................................. 118
References ................................................................................................................................ 120
CONCLUDING REMARKS ......................................................................................................... 120

5

WHO-convened global study of origins of SARS-CoV-2: China Part
Joint WHO-China Study Team report
14 January-10 February 2021

SUMMARY
In May 2020, the World Health Assembly in resolution WHA73.1 requested the Director-General of
the World Health Organization (WHO) to continue to work closely with the World Organisation for
Animal Health (OIE), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and
countries, as part of the One Health approach, to identify the zoonotic source of the virus and the route
of introduction to the human population, including the possible role of intermediate hosts. The aim is
to prevent both reinfection with the virus in animals and humans and the establishment of new zoonotic
reservoirs, thereby reducing further risks of the emergence and transmission of zoonotic diseases.
In July 2020, WHO and China began the groundwork for studies to better understand the origins of the
virus. Terms of Reference (TORs) were agreed that defined a phased approach, and the scope of studies,
the main guiding principles and expected deliverables. The TORs envisaged an initial Phase 1 of shortterm studies to better understand how the virus might have been introduced and started to circulate in
Wuhan, China.
WHO selected an international multidisciplinary team of experts to work closely with a
multidisciplinary team of Chinese experts in the design, support and conduct of these studies and to
conduct a follow-up visit to review progress and agree upon a series of further studies.
The joint international team comprised 17 Chinese and 17 international experts from other countries,
the World Health Organization (WHO), the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN),
and the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) (Annex B). The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) participated as an observer. Following initial online
meetings, a joint study was conducted over a 28-day period from 14 January to 10 February 2021 in the
city of Wuhan, People’s Republic of China.
The team agreed a workplan and established working groups to review the progress made in Phase 1
studies in the areas of: epidemiology; animals and the environment; and molecular epidemiology and
bioinformatics. During the course of the discussions, the international experts gained deeper
understanding of the methods used and data obtained. In response to requests during the visit, further
data and analyses were generated, reflecting a productive iterative approach to refining the design and
interpretation of complex studies in all areas.
In addition to group work, the team shared scientific and thematic presentations on relevant topics to
help inform its work, undertook a series of site visits to important locations and conducted interviews
with key informants.
The epidemiology working group closely examined the possibilities of identifying earlier cases of
COVID-19 through studies from surveillance of morbidity due to respiratory diseases in and around
Wuhan in late 2019. It also drew on national sentinel surveillance data; laboratory confirmations of
disease; reports of retail pharmacy purchases for antipyretics, cold and cough medications; a
convenience subset of stored samples of more than 4500 research project samples from the second half
of 2019 stored at various hospitals in Wuhan, the rest of Hubei Province and other provinces. In none
of these studies was there evidence of an impact of the causative agent of COVID-19 on morbidity in
the months before the outbreak of COVID-19.
Furthermore, surveillance data on all-cause mortality and pneumonia-specific mortality from Wuhan
city and the rest of Hubei Province were reviewed. The documented rapid increase in all-cause mortality
6

and pneumonia-specific deaths in the third week of 2020 indicated that virus transmission was
widespread among the population of Wuhan by the first week of 2020. The steep increase in mortality
that occurred one to two weeks later among the population in the Hubei Province outside Wuhan
suggested that the epidemic in Wuhan preceded the spread in the rest of Hubei Province.
Both surveillance data and cases reported to the National Notifiable Disease Reporting System
(NNDRS) in China were subjected to clinical review. The NNDRS was notified of 174 COVID-19
cases with onset of symptoms in December 2019. In an extensive exercise by 233 health institutions in
Wuhan, some 76,253 records of cases of respiratory conditions in the two months of October and
November before the outbreak in late 2019 were scrutinized clinically. Although 92 cases were
considered to be compatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection after review, subsequent testing and further
external multidisciplinary clinical review determined that none was in fact due to SARS-CoV-2
infection. Based on the analysis of this and other surveillance data, it is considered unlikely that any
substantial transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection was occurring in Wuhan during those two months.
Many of the early cases were associated with the Huanan market, but a similar number of cases were
associated with other markets and some were not associated with any markets. Transmission within the
wider community in December could account for cases not associated with the Huanan market which,
together with the presence of early cases not associated with that market, could suggest that the Huanan
market was not the original source of the outbreak. Other milder cases that were not identified, however,
could provide the link between the Huanan market and early cases without an apparent link to the
market. No firm conclusion therefore about the role of the Huanan market in the origin of the outbreak,
or how the infection was introduced into the market, can currently be drawn.
The molecular epidemiology and bioinformatics working group examined the genomic data of viruses
collected from animals. Evidence from surveys and targeted studies so far have shown that the
coronaviruses most highly related to SARS-CoV-2 are found in bats and pangolins, suggesting that
these mammals may be the reservoir of the virus that causes COVID-19. However, neither of the viruses
identified so far from these mammalian species is sufficiently similar to SARS-CoV-2 to serve as its
direct progenitor. In addition to these findings, the high susceptibility of mink and cats to SARS-CoV2 suggests that additional species of animals may act as a potential reservoir.
To analyse the viral genomes and epidemiological data from the early phase of the outbreak, the team
reviewed data collected through the China National Centre for Bioinformation integrated database on
all available coronaviruses sequences and their metadata. All sequence data from samples collected in
December 2019 and January 2020 were subjected to deeper analysis to see the diversity of viruses in
the first phases of the outbreak. For the cases detected in Wuhan, data on samples from cases with
illness onset before 31 December 2019 were linked with epidemiological background data. Several
samples from patients with exposure to the Huanan market had identical virus genomes, suggesting that
they may have been part of a cluster. However, the sequence data also showed that some diversity of
viruses already existed in the early phase of the outbreak in Wuhan, suggesting unsampled chains of
transmission beyond the Huanan market cluster. There was no obvious clustering by the
epidemiological parameters of exposure to raw meat or furry animals.
In addition, the time to the most recent common ancestor of the SARS-CoV-2 sequences in the final
data set was estimated and compared with results from previous studies. Such analyses can be
considered estimates but do not provide definitive proof of time of origins. Based on molecular
sequence data, the results suggested that the outbreak may have started some time in the months before
the middle of December 2019. The point estimates for the time to the most recent ancestor ranged from
late September to early December, but most estimates were between mid-November and early
December.
Finally, the team reviewed data from published studies from different countries suggesting early
circulation of SARS-CoV-2. The findings suggest that circulation of SARS-CoV-2 preceded the initial
detection of cases by several weeks. Some of the suspected positive samples were detected even earlier
7

than the first case in Wuhan, suggesting the possibility of missed circulation in other countries. So far,
however, the quality of the studies is limited. Nonetheless, it is important to investigate these potential
early events.
The animal and environment working group reviewed existing knowledge on coronaviruses that are
phylogenetically related to SARS-CoV-2 identified in different animals, including horseshoe bats
(Rhinolophus spp) and pangolins. However, the presence of SARS-CoV-2 has not been detected
through sampling and testing of bats or of wildlife across China. More than 80 000 wildlife, livestock
and poultry samples were collected from 31 provinces in China and no positive result was identified for
SARS-CoV-2 antibody or nucleic acid before and after the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in China. Through
extensive testing of animal products in the Huanan market, no evidence of animal infections was found.
Environmental sampling in Huanan market from right at the point of its closing showed out of 923
environmental samples in Huanan market, 73 samples were positive. This revealed widespread
contamination of surfaces with SARS-CoV-2, compatible with introduction of the virus through
infected people, infected animals or contaminated products.
The supply chains to Huanan market included cold-chain products and animal products from 20
countries, including those where samples have been reported as positive for SARS-CoV-2 before the
end of 2019 and those where close relatives of SARS-CoV-2 are found. There is evidence that some
domesticated wildlife the products of which were sold in the market are susceptible to SARS-CoV, but
none of the animal products sampled in the market tested positive in this study. In the early phase of
pandemic, due to lack of awareness of the potential role of cold chain in virus introduction and
transmission, the cold-chain products were not tested. These findings, however, do raise the possibility
of different potential pathways of introduction. Preliminary sampling and testing of other markets in
Wuhan and upstream suppliers to the Huanan market taken during 2020 did not reveal evidence of
SARS-CoV-2 circulating in animals.
SARS-CoV-2 has been found to persist in conditions found in frozen food, packaging and cold-chain
products. Index cases in recent outbreaks in China have been linked to the cold chain; the virus has been
found on packages and products from other countries that supply China with cold-chain products,
indicating that it can be carried long distances on cold-chain products.
Further analysis will examine spatial and temporal correlations and correct for underlying biases in
sampling, and also to trace frozen products back to the Huanan market from suppliers.
The team suggested next-phase studies to help tracing the origin of SARS-CoV-2 and the closest
common ancestor to this virus, including analysis of trade and history of trade in animals and products
in other markets, particularly in markets epidemiologically linked to early human cases or sequence
data, surveys of susceptible animals in farms in South-East Asia and further afield for viruses related to
SARS-CoV-2, livestock farms where coronavirus-susceptible animals are present, and continued,
targeted surveys of fur farms for SARS-CoV-2 and related viruses. Farmers, suppliers and their contacts
could be followed up, and cohorts of workers who have an occupational risk of exposure to animals and
cold-chain products could be serologically tested for unusually high antibody titres that might suggest
a risk for SARS-Cov-2 emergence.
The next phase studies include testing wildlife samples for SARS-CoV-2 related viral sequence and
antibodies; continuing surveys of Rhinolophus bats in southern provinces of China and countries around
East Asia, South-East Asia and any other regions where Rhinolophus bats are distributed; tracing the
cold chain product supplier countries where SARS-CoV-2 positive testing was preliminarily reported
before the end of 2019, and where evidence of more distantly related SARSr-CoV in bats outside Asia
were reported, if there are credible links. Conduct further relevant traceability research studies in
countries and regions with initial reports of positive results in sewage, serum, human or animal
tissues/swab and other SARS-CoV-2 test by the end of 2019. Convene a global expert group to support
future joint traceability research on the origin of epidemics.
8

The joint international team made a series of recommendations for each area (see details in the report)
and in doing so assessed the likelihood of different possible pathways for the introduction of the virus.
The joint international team examined four scenarios for introduction:
• direct zoonotic transmission to humans (spillover);
• introduction through an intermediate host followed by spillover;
• introduction through the (cold) food chain;
• introduction through a laboratory incident.
For each of these possible pathways of emergence, the joint team conducted a qualitative risk
assessment, considering the available scientific evidence and findings. It also stated the arguments
against each possibility. The team assessed the relative likelihood of these pathways and prioritized
further studies that would potentially increase knowledge and understanding globally.
The joint team’s assessment of likelihood of each possible pathway was as follows:
• direct zoonotic spillover is considered to be a possible-to-likely pathway;
• introduction through an intermediate host is considered to be a likely to very likely pathway;
• introduction through cold/ food chain products is considered a possible pathway;
• introduction through a laboratory incident was considered to be an extremely unlikely pathway.

BACKGROUND
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 was first observed when cases of unexplained pneumonia were noted
in the city of Wuhan, China. (1) During the first weeks of the epidemic in Wuhan, an association was
noted between the early cases and the Wuhan Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market (hereafter referred to
as the “Huanan market”); cases were mainly reported in operating dealers and vendors.(1) The
authorities closed the market on 1 January 2020 for environmental sanitation and disinfection. The
market, which predominantly sold aquatic products and seafood as well as some farmed wild animal
products, was initially suspected to be the epicentre of the epidemic, suggesting an event at the humananimal interface. Retrospective investigations identified additional cases with onset of disease in
December 2019, and not all the early cases reported an association with the Huanan Market.(2)
Although the role of civets as intermediate hosts in the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) in 2002-2004 had been favoured and a role for pangolins in the outbreak of COVID-19 was
initially posited, subsequent epidemiological and epizootic studies have not substantiated the
contribution of these animals in transmission to humans. The possible intermediate host of SARS-CoV2 remains elusive.
Bats have been identified as the hosts of a series of important zoonotic viruses (for example, Nipah
virus, Hendra virus and SARS-CoV), including coronaviruses with considerable genetic diversity.(3, 4)
Of particular relevance with regard to COVID-19 are those coronaviruses that were found to be
associated with the outbreaks in humans of SARS in 2002 and the Middle East respiratory syndrome
(MERS) in 2013.(5)
The causative virus of COVID-19 was rapidly isolated from patients and sequenced, with the results
from China subsequently being shared and published in January 2020.(6) The findings showed that it
was a positive-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Coronaviridae family (a subgroup B
betacoronavirus) and was new to humans. In the early work, analysis of the genomic sequence of the
new virus (SARS-CoV-2) showed high homology with that of the coronavirus that caused SARS in
2002-2004, namely SARS-CoV (another subgroup B betacoronavirus).(5) Over the next year extensive
work globally on sequences and phylogeny followed and the results have been shared internationally
and stored through the GISAID platform.
9

SARS-CoV-2 also shares a 96.2% homology with a sequence of a strain of coronavirus (RaTG13)
previously identified by genetic sequencing from a horseshoe bat sample (Rhinolophus species) and to
a lesser extent with a strain isolated from pangolins. The RaTG13 virus sequence is the closest known
sequence to SARS-CoV-2.

As with the coronaviruses that cause SARS and MERS, human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV2 was soon established, (7) but the virus demonstrated much greater infectivity than these other two
coronaviruses. (8) SARS-CoV-2 shows a broad tissue tropism, in particular binding through its spike
protein to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). It also directly infects endothelial cells lining the
blood vessels, unusually for a human respiratory virus. Other novel pathological features of the virus
are hypercoagulability and the excessive multi-organ immune system response and long-term sequelae.
People infected with SARS-CoV-2 appear to be most infectious at the time of onset of symptoms but
were also infectious in the days before onset. Infections can be asymptomatic, cause a mild illness or
result in severe disease and death.
In February 2020 the joint WHO-China mission on COVID-19 (9) was convened to inform planning in
China and internationally on the next steps in the response to the ongoing outbreak of COVID-19. Its
major objectives were:
•
•
•
•

to enhance understanding of the evolving COVID-19 outbreak in China and the nature and
impact of ongoing containment measures;
to share knowledge on the COVID-19 response and preparedness measures being implemented
in countries affected by or at risk of importations of COVID-19;
to generate recommendations for adjusting COVID-19 containment and response measures in
China and internationally; and
to establish priorities for a collaborative programme of work, research and development to
address critical gaps in knowledge and response and readiness tools and activities.

In May 2020, the Seventy-third World Health Assembly adopted resolution WHA73.1 on the COVID19 response. Through the resolution, Members States requested the Director-General “to continue to
work closely with the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and countries, as part of the One-Health Approach to identify
the zoonotic source of the virus and the route of introduction to the human population, including the
possible role of intermediate hosts, including through efforts such as scientific and collaborative field
missions, which will enable targeted interventions and a research agenda to reduce the risk of similar
events occurring, as well as to provide guidance on how to prevent infection with severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in animals and humans and prevent the
establishment of new zoonotic reservoirs, as well as to reduce further risks of emergence and
transmission of zoonotic diseases”.
In July 2020, building on the recommendations of the Seventy-third World Health Assembly, the WHO
sent an advance team to China to agree on a way forward to better understand the origins of the virus.
The agreed Terms of Reference (10) defined the scope of studies, the main guiding principles and the
main expected deliverables. These ToRs envisaged two phases of studies: short-term studies (Phase 1)
to better understand how the virus started to circulate in Wuhan; and, building on the findings and the
published scientific literature, longer-term studies (Phase 2). The ToRs included the setting up of a joint
international team of experts that would help analyse Phase 1 studies outcomes and design, and support
and conduct the Phase 2 studies. The work aimed to contribute to improving the understanding of the
virus origins. The overall results and findings would benefit improved global preparedness and response
to SARS-CoV-2 and emerging zoonotic diseases of similar origin.
10

References
(1) Huang CL, Wang YM, Li XW, Ren LL, Zhao JP, Hu Y et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020 doi: 10.1016/S01406736(20)30183-5.
(2) Nishiura H, Linton NM, Akhmetzhanov AR. Initial cluster of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
infections in Wuhan, China is consistent with substantial human-to-human transmission. J Clin.
Med. 2020 Feb 11;9(2):488. doi: 10.3390/jcm9020488.
(3) Hu B, Zeng L-P, Yang X-L, Ge X-Y, Zhang W, Li B et al. (2017). Discovery of a rich gene
pool of bat SARS-related coronaviruses provides new insights into the origin of SARS
coronavirus. PLoS Pathog 13:e1006698.
(4) Latinne A, Hu B, Olival KJ, Zhu G, Zhang L, Li H et al. (2020). Origin and cross-species
transmission of bat coronaviruses in China. Nature Communications 11:4235.
(5) Zhu, N., Zhang, D., Wang, W., Li, X., Yang, B., et al., 2020. A novel coronavirus from patients
with pneumonia in China, 2019. New EnglandJjournal of Medicine.
(6) Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, Hu Y et al. A new coronavirus associated
with human respiratory disease in China. Nature. 2020 Mar;579(7798):265-269. doi:
10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3. Epub 2020 Feb 3. Erratum in: Nature. 2020 Apr;580(7803):E7.
PMID: 32015508; PMCID: PMC7094943.
(7) Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KK, Chu H, Yang J et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia
associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study
of a family cluster. Lancet. 2020;S0140-6736(20)30154-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S01406736(20)30154-9 PMID: 31986261
(8) Petersen E, Koopmans M, Go U, Hamer DH, Petrosillo N, Castelli F et al. Comparing SARSCoV-2 with SARS-CoV and influenza pandemics. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020 Sep;20(9):e238e244. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30484-9. Epub 2020 Jul 3.
(9) https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19final-report.pdf.
(10)
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/who-convened-global-study-of-the-originsof-SARS-CoV-C-2.

11

MEMBERS OF THE JOINT INTERNATIONAL TEAM AND METHODS OF WORK
On 17 August 2020, the WHO Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) issued a call
for expressions of interest for experts to participate in the international team to study the origins of
SARS-CoV-2 jointly with Chinese experts. In September 2020, the WHO Secretariat evaluated the
candidates received as well as candidates proposed by WHO Member States against the expertise
needed, including:
•
•
•
•
•
•

senior epidemiologists, with expertise in infectious disease epidemiology and operational
research
senior data scientists, with expertise in advanced statistics and infectious disease modelling,
particularly in operational contexts
senior laboratory experts, particularly with experience in SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics and
serological studies in human and/or animal populations
senior food safety experts, with experience in persistence of viruses and virus transmission
through food and the environment
senior veterinary epidemiologists, with experience in coronaviruses and animals, zoonoses
and zoonotic epidemiological investigations
senior animal health experts, with experience in emerging animal diseases, food animal
production and animal disease surveillance.

Among the qualified candidates, additional criteria such as geographical representation and gender were
taken into consideration and a list of 10 members was finalised and shared with China officially on 30
September. On 15 October 2020, the Government of China indicated that it had no objection to the list
of the international team members.
The joint international team comprised 17 national Chinese, the 10 international experts from Australia,
Denmark, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Russian Federation, Sudan, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Viet Nam, and United States of America, plus seven other experts and support
staff from the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and WHO. It was headed jointly by Dr
Peter K Ben Embarek of WHO and Professor Liang Wannian of the People’s Republic of China. The
full list of the Chinese members and their affiliations and their international counterparts is available in
Annex B. Two staff members from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
participated as observers.

Declarations of interest
The WHO international team was finalized with the completion of administrative procedures, including
a declaration of interest and a confidentiality undertaking. All declared interests were assessed and
found not to interfere with the independence and transparency of the work. The declared interests were
shared with all team members and were managed by the WHO Secretariat.

Working procedures
All members of the team served in their personal scientific capacity and not in that of any institution or
government with which they were associated. All team members had the same status within the team
and all conclusions and decisions were formed jointly, with the same weight being given to the word of
each member.
12

Methods of work
The joint study was conducted by the joint team over a 28-day period from 14 January to 10 February
2021 in Wuhan, China. This followed a series of virtual meetings of the WHO international team and
the Chinese experts from October to December 2020.
The joint team began working through a series of formal and informal virtual meetings. For the first
two weeks, the international team members remained in quarantine and worked exclusively with
Chinese experts through video/teleconference calls, exchanging information and presentations through
electronic means. For the second 14-day period, Chinese public health regulations required that the
international team remained under health monitoring. As a result, all site visits, meetings and interviews
proposed by international experts were planned and agreed in advance, and conducted with due regard
for public health measures, including physical distancing, and the necessary flexibility to facilitate the
ground work of the team.
The joint study began its formal work with a plenary meeting of the international team and the team
leading or contributing to the response in China through the National Prevention and Control Task
Force. Participants reviewed the initial terms of reference for the work agreed upon for the Phase 1
studies decided on by China and the WHO in July 2020.
A workplan was agreed for the joint study on origins tracing and the development of a joint report with
recommendations for Phase 2 studies (Annex A1), as mandated in the July ToRs. It was agreed to
establish three focused working groups: (1) epidemiology, (2) molecular epidemiology and
bioinformatics, and (3) animal and environment. The schedule of work is available in Annex A2.
Extensive discussions, with full interpretation, site visits and input from a large number of Chinese
health professionals, scientists and other experts, culminated in the consideration of an executive
summary of the draft final report for presentation at the end of the joint study.
In the July 2020 ToRs, specific studies were agreed by China and WHO. Based on these ToRs, the
Chinese team initiated epidemiological, environmental and retrospective studies, the results of which
were presented in meetings before and during the visit. The international team reviewed the work done
on these agreed Phase 1 studies, some of which were still works in progress. In the course of the
discussions the international team gained a deeper understanding of the methods used and discussed
additional analyses for some of the data sets provided, reflecting a need for an iterative approach to
refine the analyses of such complex studies.
The final report describes the methods and results as presented by the Chinese team’s researchers. The
findings are based on the information exchanged among the joint team, the extensive work undertaken
in China in response to requests from the international team, including re-analysis or additional analysis
of collected information, review of national and local governmental reports, discussions on control and
prevention measures with national and local experts and response teams, and observations made and
insights gained during site visits. The figures have been produced using information and data collected
during site visits and with the agreement of the relevant groups. References are available for any
information in this report that has already been published in journals. Conclusions and
recommendations are based on joint discussions.
In concluding plenary sessions, the joint team consolidated its findings, generated conclusions and

proposed further actions.

13

Presentations
In addition to the exchange of information in working groups, detailed presentations were given on
highly relevant topics to help to inform the work of the joint team:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

An overview of the development of the integrated database developed by the China National
Center for Bioinformation (Dr Song Shuhui)
The transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among mink in the Netherlands and steps taken to control
outbreaks (Professor Marion Koopmans)
Pathogen identification of COVID-19 (Professor Shi Zhengli)
Animal and environmental collection and testing in Huanan Market (Dr William Jun Liu and
Dr He Xiaozhou)
Types and sources of animal products in the Huanan Market (Dr Wu Zhiqiang)
COVID-19 pandemic traceability and the cold chain virus transmission (Dr Jia Zhiyuan and
Prof Jiang Jingkun)
Progress in tracing and monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 in domestic animals (Drs Ni Jianqiang, Li
Dong, Wang Chuanbin and Xin Shengpeng (China Animal CDC)
The investigation into the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 in Xinfadi market, Beijing in May-June
2020 (Dr Pang Xinghuo)
An overview of geographical hotspots for potential emergence of zoonotic viral diseases (in
particular coronavirus-related diseases) (Dr Peter Daszak)
Laboratory detection methods for SARS-CoV-2 detection in animal samples (Dr Ni Jianqiang)
The activity of the SARS-CoV-2 Laboratory, Hubei Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(Dr Huo Xixiang)
Surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 in wild animals (Dr He Hongxuan)
The infection risk in cats, dogs and pigs to SARS-CoV-2 from Central China Agriculture
University (HZAU) (Dr Jin Maili1).
Presentation of the Wuhan Institute of Virology (Dr Wang Yanyi)
Presentation of the Wuhan Blood Centre (Dr Wang Ian)

PowerPoint presentations from the plenary sessions are attached in Annex C.

Site visits
The objective of the site visits was to obtain first-hand information about the places, the environment,
the workflows and processes that would be crucial for the study subjects and the origins of the virus, as
well as meeting key people. The places were grouped into the following categories:
1. sites related to treatment, diagnosis and epidemiological investigation of the first cases,
including hospitals, laboratories, the Huanan Market and its neighborhood, traders and
suppliers, the first patients, community leaders and journalists
2. centres for human and animal disease control
3. key surveillance partners, including municipal and provincial reference laboratories for
influenza-like illnesses (ILI) and blood donor centres
4. other key partners, including authorities of market regulation, environment and agriculture and
researchers.

1

In place of a visit to the Huazhong Agricultural University.

14

The schedule of visits is set out in Table 1, and the location of site visits and other relevant points
provided in Map 1. During these visits, the team had detailed discussions and consultations; the annexes
listed contain summary reports of the visits. For some of these visits, only part of the team participated
while other team members worked in their respective working groups.
Table 1. Date and location of visits, with annexed summary reports
29 January, pm

Xinhua Hospital (Hubei Hospital of Integrated Annex D1
Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine)

30 January, am

Jinyintan Hospital for Infectious Diseases

30 January, pm

COVID-19 Exhibition

31 January, am

Baishazhou Wholesale Market

Annex D3

31 January, pm

Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market

Annex D4

1 February

Hubei Province and Wuhan CDCs

Annex D5

2 February

Wuhan Hubei Animal CDC

Annex D6

3 February

Wuhan Institute of Virology

Annex D7

4 February

Jianxinyuan Community Centre

Annex D8

Annex D2

In addition, experts from the following institutions visited the international team at its hotel to present
information and to engage in discussions: Huazhong Agricultural University (4 February), Wuhan
Blood Centre (5 February) and Wuhan Central Hospital (6 February).

Map 1. Site visits, Wuhan.
15

MAIN FINDINGS
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Before the joint study, the earliest recognized cases of COVID-19 in Wuhan were thought to have
occurred in early December 2019.(1) Preliminary information from surveillance of severe pneumonia
had suggested no unusual clustering or departure from trends in the weeks and months preceding these
first reported cases. As SARS-CoV-2 infection may, however, be asymptomatic or cause only mild
illness in many individuals,(2-4) it is likely that others were infected at the time of the recognition of
the early cases and that transmission could have been occurring in the community before this point.
Investigation into the possible occurrence of earlier cases is therefore important.
Many of the early cases were reported to have a link to the Huanan market, a place where animals and
animal products were sold to the public. Some reports have suggested the zoonotic spread of SARSCoV-2 through this market, although the role of the market, as either the source of the initial
transmission of the virus to humans or as an amplifier of the early epidemic, was unclear, as several
early cases reported no link to the Huanan market or any other market in Wuhan.(5)
Several Phase 1 studies were agreed following the drafting of the ToRs in July 20202, and work was
carried out ahead of the arrival of the international team in January 2021. This work included extensive
data collection, data cleaning, review of clinical records, patient interviews and testing, and preparatory
analyses. The studies were reviewed in depth by the joint international WHO/Chinese team, and
additional analyses were done based on these reviews. The overall focus of the studies was to determine:
(1) whether there was evidence of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan or Hubei Province in
the period preceding the recognized outbreak in Wuhan in December 2019 using routine disease
and death surveillance data, review of clinical records and targeted SARS-CoV-2 laboratory
testing;
(2) whether there was evidence of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the wider population of Wuhan
or Hubei Province at the time the outbreak was recognized in Wuhan in December 2019 using
information from the cases reported with onset in that month; and
(3) whether the epidemiological characteristics of the early cases associated with the Huanan
market pointed to a specific time, location or source of the introduction of infection into the
market at the beginning of the outbreak.

Surveillance data – morbidity
Epidemiological analysis of influenza-like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory
infection (SARI) surveillance before January 2020
Introduction
This section summarizes work carried out by the Chinese team, together with key findings based on the
methods and analyses agreed in the Terms of Reference. A detailed account of this work is attached at
Annex E1.
ILI and SARI surveillance, with appropriate laboratory confirmation, is conducted routinely as a
measure of the impact of influenza and other respiratory virus infections in the community.(6) The ILI
2

https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/who-convened-global-study-of-the-origins-of-sars-cov-2

16

case definition is designed to capture a high proportion of patients with influenza (high sensitivity) but,
as the symptoms are also common to other respiratory infections, the case definition is non-specific. To
increase the specificity of this surveillance for influenza infection, the ILI and SARI cases are linked
with data from laboratory testing for influenza in a subset of cases from which respiratory tract samples
are obtained.
China operates a national surveillance system, based on a network of hospitals and Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) laboratories, to monitor the occurrence of ILI and SARI
throughout the year.(7) This system monitors trends in the occurrence of influenza (including new
influenza virus types/A subtypes) and provides an early warning of changes in influenza activity. This
system also contributes to the surveillance for other respiratory disease syndromes and pathogens.(8)
Objective
The Phase 1 studies and the subsequent work agreed by the working group set out to:
(1) review and compare the trends in ILI and SARI surveillance data among the population of
Wuhan, Hubei province and neighbouring provinces and municipalities from 2016 to 2019
(2) seek clusters of illness compatible with COVID-19 in the months preceding the onset of the
SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in December 2019.
Methods
Population
The population of Hubei Province is about 59 million and of Wuhan about 11.1 million.
Surveillance systems
Sentinel surveillance for ILI
The national ILI sentinel surveillance system gathers data for ILI from two hospitals in Wuhan. These
data were reviewed in the months preceding the outbreak and compared with previous years. As one
general (No. 1 Hospital of Wuhan) and one paediatric hospital (Wuhan’s Children’s Hospital) in Wuhan
contribute data to the national sentinel surveillance system, trends in ILI in children and adults in Wuhan
can be examined separately. Elsewhere in China, data are collected from hospitals that include all age
groups. In Hubei province, outside Wuhan, ILI surveillance includes 18 sentinel hospitals and 13
associated network laboratories.
The number of cases of ILI and the total number of visits to outpatient and emergency departments are
reported weekly by age groups (0-4 years, 5-14 years, 15-24 years, 25-59 years and ≥60 years).
Sentinel surveillance for severe acute respiratory illness (SARI)
After the SARS epidemic in 2003, WHO recommended that influenza surveillance systems should also
include sentinel surveillance for SARI, which is often defined as ILI plus one additional symptom or sign of
severe illness in a hospitalized patient.(9)
In China, the national SARI sentinel system includes a network of sentinel SARI general hospitals
located in either a provincial capital cities or other cities with convenient transportation networks.(9)
The SARI sentinel hospital for Hubei Province is in Jingzhou; there is no SARI sentinel hospital in
Wuhan. In Hubei’s neighbouring provinces, there are SARI sentinel hospitals in Luohe (Henan
Province), Hefei (Anhui Province) and Changsha (Hunan Province).
The departments responsible for SARI surveillance include respiratory, paediatric internal medicine
and infectious diseases, and intensive care units.
Patients who meet the SARI case definition are recorded daily. Cases are counted as hospitalized
patients in age groups (0-1, 2-4, 5-14, 15-49, 50-64 and ≥65 years).

17

Analytical methods
The case information and laboratory results of ILI cases in Hubei, Anhui, Henan, Hunan, Shaanxi,
Chongqing and Jiangxi provinces from 2016 to 2019 were reviewed and trends analysed, as were the
SARI case information and laboratory results in Hubei, Henan, Anhui and Hunan provinces for the
same period. Data, plotted as weekly numbers of cases for the period of January to December 2019,
were compared with levels for the same months in previous years to identify deviations from the
expected trends.
For ILI, the percentage of all outpatient and emergency department visits to the sentinel hospitals that
were categorized as ILI was recorded. The percentage of the subset of ILI cases from which respiratory
specimens were examined and reported to be due to influenza virus infection was recorded.
For SARI, the percentage of all outpatient and emergency department visits to the sentinel hospitals
that were categorized as SARI was recorded. The percentage of SARI cases from which respiratory
specimens were examined and reported to be due to influenza virus infection was recorded.
Results
1. Analysis of ILI surveillance data in Wuhan in 2019, compared with 2016-2018
A similar level of occurrence of ILI cases in the sentinel surveillance systems in Wuhan is seen in 2019
and in the previous three years, until week 48, when a steep increase is seen in 2019, which rapidly
exceeds the trend of the previous three years (Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. Weekly number of ILI cases in the sentinel surveillance in Wuhan in 2019 compared with
the average weekly value for the previous three years.
In 2019, most of the ILI cases reported in Wuhan were in children (Figs. 2A and 2B). The number of
cases in children increased rapidly from week 49. The number of ILI cases reported in adults was
considerably lower than that reported in children. An increase in the number of cases in adults was seen
in weeks 4 and 5 of 2019, and smaller peaks in weeks 17, 46 and 52.
Influenza virus infection was prevalent in children with ILI in Wuhan in the early part of 2019 (Fig.
2C) accounting for more than 50% of ILI cases tested in the period from week 3 to 8. Influenza was
also seen in adults during this period but accounted for a lower proportion of ILI cases tested. A sharp
rise is seen in the proportion of ILI cases due to influenza virus infection in children from week 48
followed, two to three weeks later by a rise in adults. Both influenza B and influenza A (subtype H3N2)
were reported by the Chinese team to be circulating in the Wuhan population in December 2019.
18

Fig. 2A. Weekly number of ILI cases in children in the sentinel surveillance in Wuhan in 2019
(and percentage of outpatient visits categorized as ILI, [ILI %]).

Fig. 2B. Weekly number of ILI cases in adults in the sentinel surveillance in Wuhan in 2019
(and percentage of outpatient visits categorized as ILI, [ILI %]).

19

Fig. 2C. Weekly percentage of ILI cases with laboratory-confirmed influenza [FLU %] in the
sentinel surveillance in children and adults in Wuhan in 2019.

The weekly percentage of ILI cases in both children and adults in the sentinel surveillance in Wuhan in
2019 laboratory-confirmed to be due to influenza virus infection was compared with the weekly
percentages in the previous three years (Annex E1). There was considerable week-to-week variation in
the proportion reported positive for influenza virus in both children and adults, with the percentage
generally being lower between week 15 and week 40 and higher between week 40 and week 15 of the
next year (consistent with the usual seasonal influenza activity). The rise in influenza virus infections,
as a proportion of ILI, is apparent in both children and adults at the end of 2019: in children this rise is
comparable to rises seen in earlier years; in adults the steep rise in ILI due to influenza virus infection
at the end of 2019 is apparent but the percentage positive is little different to that seen at the end of
2016. Only about 20 samples per week were tested.

2. Analysis of ILI surveillance data in Hubei province

Fig. 3. Weekly number of ILI cases in all ages in the sentinel surveillance in Wuhan and other
cities in Hubei province in 2019.
20

In 2019, the weekly distribution of ILI cases in all ages in Wuhan was similar to that in other cities in
Hubei Province, rising from the week 48 (Fig. 3).
Also, the ILI% rate in other cities in Hubei Province was similar to that of Wuhan, rising from week 49
(Figs. 4 and 5).

Fig. 4. Weekly number of ILI cases in children and adults in Hubei Province in 2019 (and
percentage of outpatient visits categorized as ILI, [ILI %]).

In 2019, most ILI cases in Hubei Province as in Wuhan city were reported in children (Fig. 4). As in
Wuhan (Fig. 1), the weekly number of ILI cases in Hubei Province (and the percentage of all
consultations categorized as ILI) rose steeply from week 49 in 2019.
The weekly percentage of ILI cases in Hubei Province in 2019 laboratory-confirmed to be due to
influenza virus infection showed less week-to-week variation than the percentage observed for Wuhan
alone (likely owing to the larger denominator of ILI cases across the whole province) but exhibited the
same general trend of higher rates before and after the end of the year and lower rates in the middle of
the year (Annex E1).

21

Fig. 5A. Weekly number of ILI cases in Hubei and six neighbouring provinces or municipalities
in 2019.

Fig. 5B. Percentage of outpatient visits categorized as ILI in Hubei and six neighbouring
provinces or municipalities in 2019.

22

Fig. 5C. Weekly percentage of ILI cases with laboratory-confirmed influenza in Hubei and six
neighbouring provinces or municipalities in 2019.

In 2019, the distribution by week of ILI cases, and the percentage of outpatient visits categorized as ILI
[ILI%] in Hubei Province was similar to that observed in the six neighbouring provinces and
municipalities (Figs. 5A and 5B). Numbers of cases were high at the beginning of the year, falling by
week 10, and rising again steeply from weeks 48 and 49. The rise in the percentage of ILI cases
laboratory-confirmed as due to influenza virus infection in Hubei at the end of 2019 was also seen in
the six neighbouring provinces or municipalities (Fig. 5C).
Conclusions
Based on the sentinel surveillance data for ILI, and the associated laboratory-confirmed influenza
activity, in Wuhan as well as Hubei and six surrounding provinces, there was a marked increase in ILI
in both children and adults at the end of 2019 in Wuhan, but no evidence to suggest substantial SARSCoV-2 transmission in the months preceding the outbreak in December was observed. The increase in
ILI is mirrored in the remainder of Hubei Province and in neighbouring provinces and municipalities.
While this increase may be explained by a contemporary increase in laboratory-confirmed influenza
activity, further time series analyses were recommended and are underway to ensure that no other
signals are present.
3. SARI surveillance in Hubei Province
Most cases of SARI reported in the sentinel surveillance in Hubei Province were in children up to the
age of 15 years (Fig. 6). The SARI surveillance is based on one hospital only and this is not located in
Wuhan. In 2019, the weekly number of SARI cases in Hubei Province, and the percentage SARI cases
represented of all outpatient and emergency department visits, varied substantially being generally
higher at the beginning and end of the year, and lower in the period from about week 29 to 48. No
increase in SARI cases is apparent in adults in the final weeks of 2019 (at the time the outbreak of
COVID-19 is now known to have been starting in Wuhan).

23

Fig. 6. Weekly number of SARI cases in Hubei Province in 2019, by age group (and the
percentage of outpatient visits categorized as SARI, [SARI %]).

Fig. 7. Percentage of outpatient visits categorized as SARI [SARI %] and the percentage of
SARI cases laboratory-confirmed to be due to influenza infection [FLU %], Hubei Province,
2019.

The percentage of SARI cases in Hubei Province in 2019 laboratory-confirmed to be due to influenza
infection was generally below 0.4%, but rose to 0.6% at the end of 2019, coincident with the rise in
influenza activity generally demonstrated by the ILI surveillance (Fig. 7).

24

Fig. 8. Percentage of outpatient visits categorized as SARI [SARI %] in the sentinel surveillance
in Hubei and neighbouring provinces in 2019.

The percentage of hospital and emergency department visits that were categorized as SARI in the
sentinel surveillance in Hubei (Fig. 8) was similar to that seen in other provinces surrounding Hubei,
with considerable week-to-week variation. The small increase in this percentage between weeks 46 and
51 of 2019 in the neighbouring provinces, compared with Hubei Province, is unlikely to be significant
in the light of the small numbers and week-to-week variation.
Conclusions
The SARI surveillance data from one single provincial hospital in Hubei Province did not suggest any
previously undetected clusters of severe respiratory illness compatible with COVID-19 in the months
preceding December 2019. Nor did the SARI surveillance data from Hubei Province provide any clear
indication of the onset of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan as was observed in the SARI surveillance
data from other provinces. This could either be due to lack of sensitivity or data incompleteness based
on the limited information from one hospital only or might reflect that this particular provincial city and
area in Hubei Province did not experience any increase in SARI cases in late 2019.
4. SARS-CoV-2 testing of respiratory tract samples from ILI surveillance in late 2019
Respiratory tract samples collected as part of ILI surveillance in Wuhan, elsewhere in Hubei Province
and in Shaanxi Province in 2019 were tested retrospectively for SARS-CoV-2 by nucleic acid tests
(Table 1). All were negative.

25

Table 1. Stored ILI samples tested for SARS-CoV-2 in late 2019.
Hubei Province
Wuhan
Month
Sentinel hospital

Sub-total

Non Subtotal
Wuhan

Shaanxi
Province

Child

Adult

Other
hospital

October

80

80

0

160

1610

1770

539

November

80

80

0

160

1782

1942

669

December

100

100

138

338

3068

3406

1196

Total

260

260

138

658

6460

7118

2404

Retrospective SARS-CoV-2 NAT on ILI surveillance swabs extending the period from 6 October 2019
to 21 January 2020 has been published.(10) This showed that 9 of 120 samples were SARS-CoV-2
NAT positive (tested at the Wuhan CDC) in the first three weeks in January: of the adults sampled 9 of
45 (20%) were SARS-CoV-2 NAT positive. This figure is higher than the proportion for influenza virus
detection in the same samples from adults where influenza NAT was positive in 7 of 45 (16%). The
nine SARS-CoV-2 NAT positives came from six different districts in Wuhan. There were no coinfections. It should be noted that no samples from adults were available for testing in the last three
weeks of December 2019, so conclusions about SARS-CoV-2 causing ILI in adults in December cannot
be made. Sample numbers in general are modest in comparison to the risk population size.
5. SARS-CoV-2 testing of respiratory tract samples from SARI surveillance in late 2019 in Hunan
and Henan provinces
Respiratory tract samples (n = 274) collected in Hunan (n = 28) and Henan provinces (n = 246) as part
of SARI surveillance in late 2019 were tested for SARS-CoV-2 by NAT. In Hunan province, there were
12 paediatric samples and 16 adult samples; in Henan province, there were 218 paediatric samples and
28 adult samples (Fig. 9). All were negative.

26

Fig. 9. Distribution and age groups of respiratory tract samples collected in Hunan and Henan
provinces as part of SARI surveillance by month in late 2019.
Conclusions
Review of retrospective testing of respiratory tract swabs collected within the ILI and SARI surveillance
system, and the adult sentinel surveillance data for ILI from one hospital in Wuhan and SARI
surveillance data from a provincial hospital in Hubei Province revealed no clear indication of substantial
unrecognized circulation of SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan during the latter part of 2019. Further time series
analyses are underway.
Recommendations
The joint team recommends further exploration of the weekly ILI trends (especially in adults) in 2019,
in comparison to the earlier years, using time series analyses.

27

Review of purchases of antipyretics, cold remedies and cough medications in retail
pharmacies in Wuhan
Introduction
Community purchase of retail antipyretics, cold and cough medications may provide a general
indication of community respiratory tract disease.(11) The joint international team requested
information on relevant medications potentially used in community respiratory tract infections.
Methods
Retail pharmacies in Wuhan provided data of purchases of antipyretics (34 types), cold remedies (47)
and cough medications (57) from September to December over four years, 2016-2019.
Results
As shown in Fig. 10, purchases of all medications increased in a linear mode over the four-year study
period.

Fig. 10. Purchases of cold medicines, cough medicines and antipyretics in pharmacies in Wuhan
in the period September-December for 2016-2019.

Conclusions
Analysis of four months of aggregated retail pharmacy purchases for antipyretics, cold and cough
medications over a period of four years was unlikely to provide a useful indicator of early SARS-CoV2 activity in the community.

28

Recommendations
Review pharmacy purchases by week during the period of September to December in 2016, 2017, 2018,
and 2019 to look for any signals of increased purchases in the weeks of September to December 2019
compared with the same weeks during the previous years. If any signals are identified, then proceed
with analyses for spatial-temporal clusters.

Mass gatherings
Introduction
Mass gatherings may facilitate transmission of respiratory viruses and there has been speculation that
SARS-CoV-2 may already have circulated in the months before December at specific mass gatherings.
The joint international team therefore requested information on mass gatherings held in Wuhan in late
2019.
Results
The Chinese Epidemiology Group provided information on of international gatherings held in Wuhan
from September-December 2019 (Table 2). These included the 7th World Military Games held from 18
to 27 October 2019 (9308 participants listed as attending), and the 44 th World Bridge Team
Championships in September 2019. In the Military Games, four African participants were diagnosed
and treated for malaria, and one U.S. citizen presented with gastroenteritis. The Jinyintan Hospital
provided medical support for the games, including on-site clinics (data from these clinics have not yet
been evaluated by the joint team). From the Bridge Championships an Italian was admitted with acute
gastroenteritis.
Table 2. Statistics on international conferences held in Wuhan, September-December 2019.

Conclusions
No appreciable signals of clusters of fever or severe respiratory disease requiring hospitalization were
identified during review of these events.
Recommendations
Consideration should be given to further joint review of the data on respiratory illness from the on-site
clinics at the Military Games in October 2019.

29

Surveillance data – mortality
Methods
A retrospective study of all-cause mortality from two mortality surveillance systems covering 14
surveillance points (covering all districts) in Wuhan city and 19 mortality surveillance points in Hubei
Province outside Wuhan was undertaken to identify and investigate early signals compatible with
potential previously undetected COVID-19-associated deaths.
Death surveillance system. The first national system was established in 1978 to monitor changes in
deaths and disease patterns in the population. In 2004, based on multi-stage stratified cluster random
sampling, the National Death Surveillance System expanded its capacity to 161 surveillance points
covering 31 provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions nationwide. The death surveillance
points system has been proved nationally to be representative and its results reflect changes in deaths
and the health status of the entire population. In 2013, it was further integrated and expanded to 605
surveillance points (Fig. 11). The new death surveillance points system became provincially
representative and covered more than 300 million people.(12) Each surveillance point is a county or a
district, and all deaths occurring in the death surveillance points system are reported. Three of the 22
surveillance points in Hubei Province are in Wuhan city. The mortality data of Wuhan city were
obtained from the Wuhan Death Surveillance System, which began in the 1970s and is regarded as one
of the earliest surveillance systems authorized by the National Health Commission. By 2009, this
system covered all 14 districts in the city, and it receives reports from more than 300 general hospitals
and primary medical institutions in Wuhan.
Population, geography and surveillance system coverage. The population data for the surveillance point
in Hubei Province came from China’s National Bureau of Statistics, and those for Wuhan city came
from the Wuhan Public Security Bureau. Hubei Province has 103 counties/districts, 14 of which are in
Wuhan. Wuhan city was an early participant in the mortality surveillance system. In Hubei Province,
20.3% of the population is covered by the death surveillance points system whereas in Wuhan the total
population is covered by the surveillance points.

A

B

Fig. 11. Maps of mortality surveillance points: in (A) China and (B) Hubei Province.
Data sources and reporting process
In the case of deaths at medical institutions (including deaths upon arrival at the hospital, deaths in the
process of pre-hospital emergency treatment, and deaths in the process of hospital diagnosis and
treatment), the admitting doctor makes the diagnosis and completes the Medical Certificate of Cause of
Death. For deaths occurring outside hospitals, the local health workers at the township health centre
30

(community health service centre) determine the causes of death according to the medical history,
physical signs and/or medical diagnosis provided by the deceased's family or others familiar with the
case, and complete the death certificate. All the information in the death certificate is reported online
through the cause of death registration and reporting system of China CDC. The underlying causes of
death are inferred and coded by a trained coder or the staff of county CDC based on the reported death
information. The ICD-10 coding system (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems (10th revision) as endorsed in May 1990 by the Forty-third World Health Assembly,
is applied.

Classification of causes of death
On 2 February 2020, the Chronic and Non-Communicable Disease Center of China CDC issued
guidance on the reporting of COVID-19-related deaths: “For the deaths of confirmed COVID-19
patients due to the deterioration of their condition, the ICD-10 coding of the underlying causes of death
shall be U07.9 (novel coronavirus infection, not specific); for highly suspected but unconfirmed
COVID-19-related deaths, the ICD-10 coding of the underlying causes shall be J12.8 (other viral
pneumonia)”. On 18 February 2020, based on the ICD-10 coding system for COVID-19 released by
WHO, the Chronic and Non-Communicable Disease Center of China CDC updated the ICD-10 code to
U07.1 (COVID-19, virus identified) for confirmed (including clinically diagnosed) COVID-19 deaths.
The temporal and spatial trends of all causes and pneumonia deaths are analysed in Wuhan and Hubei
Province (outside Wuhan), respectively. The ICD-10 codes for the causes of death are shown in Table
3.
Table 3. ICD-10 codes for classification of causes of death
Causes

ICD-10 codes

All-cause

All ICD-10 codes

Pneumonia

J12-J18.9, J98.4, U07.1

Confirmed COVID-19

U07.1

Suspected COVID-19

J12.8*

*

J12.8 is the code for deaths of suspected COVID-19 cases only after 2020.

Statistical analyses
The number of weekly deaths and mortality rates in Wuhan and Hubei Province outside Wuhan from
2016 to early 2020 was calculated, and the weekly all-cause mortality and pneumonia mortality rates in
2019 and early 2020 were compared with the average mortality rate from 2016 to 2018. The age
subgroup analysis included all age groups and people over 65 years of age, respectively.
The weekly all-cause deaths and pneumonia deaths from 2016 to 2018 by different districts in Wuhan
were calculated. The over-dispersed Poisson regression model accounting for seasonal patterns was
established to estimate the weekly baseline deaths (that is, expected deaths) and the 95% confidence
interval in different districts in Wuhan in 2019.(13-15) Excess deaths are statistically significant when
the observed deaths exceed the upper limit of 95% confidence interval.

Results
Temporal trends of all-cause mortality
Wuhan city
All age groups. Comparative trends of all-cause mortality for deaths in all age-groups in 2016, 2017
and 2018 allowed for direct comparison with that in 2019 and early 2020 in Wuhan. The trend of
31

average mortality in the months of October to December in 2019 is similar (and slightly lower) to that
in previous years until a steep increase beginning from week 3 (15-21 January) of 2020 (Fig. 12). After
removal of confirmed and suspected COVID-19 cases, the trend in overall mortality does not change
and is still lower than previous years until week 3 of 2020.
A

B

Fig. 12. A: Comparison of trends of the all-cause mortality rate in 2019-2020 against average rate
for 2016-2018 in Wuhan, for all age groups; B: Comparison of trends of the all-cause mortality
excluding confirmed and suspected COVID-19 mortality rates in 2019-2020 against average rate
of 2016-2018 in Wuhan, for all age groups.

32

Age-group: >65 years of age. The trends are similar to overall figure, but the scale is different. The allcause mortality rate of people 65 years or older in Wuhan during weeks 40-52 of 2019 (from October
to December 2019) was lower than the average mortality rate of the same periods of 2016 to 2018. The
all-cause mortality rates of people 65 years or older in Wuhan exceeded the average mortality rate in
week 4 of 2020 (22-28 January 2020) and increased rapidly (Fig. 13).

A

B
Fig. 13. Trends of all-cause mortality. A: Comparison of trends of the all-cause mortality rate in
2019-2020 against average rate of 2016-2018 in Wuhan, for the >65-year-old population; B:
Comparison of trends of the all-cause excluding confirmed and suspected COVID-19 mortality
rates in 2019-2020 against average rate of 2016-2018 in Wuhan, for the >65-year-old population.
33

Hubei Province outside Wuhan
All age groups. There were no obvious differences between the mortality rate in weeks 40-52 of 2019
(from October to December 2019) and the average mortality rate in the same period from 2016 to 2018
in Hubei Province outside Wuhan. The all-cause mortality rate for 2019 in Hubei Province outside
Wuhan was lower than the average level in the same period from week 5 to week 11 of 2020 (from
29 January to 18 March 2020). After the confirmed and suspected COVID-19 deaths were excluded
from all-cause deaths in 2020, the trend was similar to that of all-cause mortality, with the mortality
rate from week 5 to week 11 of 2020 lower than the average of the same period. Trends over time show
no obvious deviation from average rates from previous years (Fig. 14).

A

B
Fig. 14. A: Comparison of trends of the all-cause mortality rate in 2019-2020 versus the average
rate of 2016-2018, Hubei Province outside Wuhan, for all age groups; B: Comparison of trends
of the all-cause mortality excluding confirmed and suspected COVID-19 mortality rates in 20192020 versus the average rate of 2016-2018 Hubei Province outside Wuhan, for all age groups.
34

Age-group >65 years of age. The all-cause mortality rate in Hubei Province outside Wuhan from week
5 to week 11 of 2020 (29 January–18 March 2020) was lower than the average level of the same period.
After confirmed and suspected COVID-19-related deaths were excluded from the all-cause mortality
among the people over 65 years in 2020, the trend in mortality rate was similar to that of the all-cause
mortality rate, and the mortality rate from week 5 to week 11 in 2020 was lower than the average
mortality rate of the same period (Fig. 15).

A

B
Fig. 15. A: Comparison of trends of the all-cause mortality rate in 2019-2020 against the average
rate of 2016-2018, Hubei Province outside Wuhan, for the >65-year-old population; B:
Comparison of trends of the all-cause excluding confirmed and suspected COVID-19 mortality
rate in 2019-2020 against the average rate in 2016-2018 for Hubei Province outside Wuhan, for
the >65-year-old population.
35

Pneumonia mortality
Wuhan city
All ages. The mortality rate for pneumonia in Wuhan from week 40 to week 52 of 2019 (from October
to December 2019) was not different from the average of the same periods in 2016-2018. From the third
week of 2020 (15-21 January 2020), the mortality rate of pneumonia was higher than average value of
that in the same period in 2016-2018 and rose rapidly. From October to December 2019, the trends
show no obvious deviation from the previous years (Fig. 16).

Fig. 16. Comparison of trends of the pneumonia mortality rate in 2019-2020 against the average
rate for 2016-2018, Wuhan, for all age groups.

Age-group >65 years of age. The pneumonia mortality rate among population aged over 65 years in
Wuhan during the weeks 40-52 of 2019 (October to December 2019) was not different from the average
level of the same periods in 2016-2018. From the third week of 2020 (15-21 January 2020), the
mortality rate was higher than the average and rose rapidly. From October to December 2019, the trend
shows no obvious deviation from the previous years (Fig. 17).

36

Fig. 17. Comparison of trends of the pneumonia mortality rate in 2019-2020 versus the average
rate of 2016-2018, Wuhan, for the >65-year-old population.
Hubei Province outside Wuhan
All ages. From October to December 2019 (weeks 40-52), the pneumonia mortality rate in Hubei
Province outside Wuhan was slightly lower than the average level of previous years; no obvious change
in the trend of pneumonia mortality rate was found and one minor spike was identified in week 44. The
mortality rate for pneumonia in Hubei Province outside Wuhan, from weeks 5-7 of 2020, was higher
than the average level of the same period in previous years (Fig. 18).

Fig. 18. Comparison of trends of the pneumonia mortality rate in 2019-2020 against average rate
of 2016-2018, Hubei Province outside Wuhan, for all age groups.

37

Age-group >65 years of age. From October to December 2019 (weeks 40-52), the pneumonia mortality
rate among people over 65 years in Hubei Province outside Wuhan was slightly lower than the average
value of previous years. There was a minor spike in week 44 and a steep increase and peak in week 6
of 2020 (Fig. 19).

Fig. 19. Comparison of trends of the pneumonia mortality rate in 2019-2020 against average rate
of 2016-2018, Hubei outside Wuhan, for the >65-year-old population.

Spatial patterns of mortality in Wuhan
All-cause. Visualization of weekly excess mortality 2019-2020 in maps of the weekly death count by
district in Wuhan (Fig. 20) showed increased mortality in week 30 (as seen in trend figures). In week
39 the map indicates an increase in Jiangxia district. This signal was investigated in-depth and revealed
a weekly total number of deaths of 77 in this district. The estimated baseline is 59, the upper limit of
95% confidence interval is 76, resulting in only 1 excess death. Stratifying for age groups >65 years of
age, provided no change in signal. Only in the third week of January 2020 is excess mortality reported
which is fully compatible with COVID-19. The conclusion is that the signal of excess deaths before
week 3 of 2020 is considered as unlikely to be compatible with previously undetected COVID-19
deaths.

38

Fig. 20. Weekly excess mortality of all-cause by districts in Wuhan, 2019-2020.

Pneumonia deaths. Weekly excess mortality due to pneumonia in 2019-2020 is visualized in maps of
weekly death count by district in Wuhan during 2019-2020 (Fig. 21): increased mortality is seen in
week 32 (late summer) and week 40 in Caidian district and week 44 in Jianghan district. These signals
were investigated in-depth and revealed a total of three deaths (upper 95% confidence interval: two,
thus one excess death) in week 40 and five deaths in week 44 (upper 95% confidence interval: four,
thus one excess death). When stratifying for age groups >65 years, there were no changes in signals.
The conclusion is that the signals of excess pneumonia deaths are considered unlikely to be compatible
with previously undetected COVID-19 deaths.

39

Fig. 21. Weekly excess mortality of pneumonia by districts in Wuhan, 2019-2020.

Strengths and limitations
The strengths of this study are that the analysis included large numbers of mortality data from several
participating centres at provincial as well as Wuhan city-level, including death surveillance data
covering all districts of Wuhan with high quality of cause-specific mortality (<2% ill-defined causes of
death).
One limitation of this study is related to the Hubei provincial-level data having a lower
representativeness with only 22 surveillance points and a resulting coverage of 20.3% of the total
population. Nevertheless, the sample is considered representative of the Hubei provincial population
and thus the data are sufficient to indicate overall mortality level and trends of mortality rates in Hubei
Province.

Conclusions
During the period August-December 2019, review of all-cause as well as pneumonia-specific mortality
surveillance data provided little evidence of any unexpected fluctuations in mortality that might suggest
the occurrence of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the population in the period before December 2019.
This does not exclude, however, the possibility that some SARS-CoV-2 circulation was occurring in
the population at a low level, as changes in mortality at the population level would be unlikely to be
sufficiently sensitive to detect this possibility.
Four signals of excess weekly deaths compared to previous years were identified in the period reviewed.
In-depth examination of these revealed a total of three excess deaths (one death in week 39 in the allcause mortality and two deaths in the pneumonia-specific death surveillance data in week 40 and one
in week 44, respectively, in two different districts of Wuhan). Based on the few and scattered excess
40

deaths identified, we consider these less likely to be compatible with previously undetected COVID-19
deaths.
Given the time lag from onset of disease to COVID-19-associated death of a median of 17 days (12-22
days) in Wuhan, the documented rapid increase in all-cause mortality in week 3 of 2020 and pneumoniaspecific deaths in week 3 of 2020 suggests that virus transmission was widespread among the population
of Wuhan by the first week (1-7 January) of 2020. The steep incline in mortality rate occurred with 12 weeks’ delay among the population in the Hubei Province outside Wuhan, supporting the previously
reported (16) notion that the epidemic in Wuhan predated the spread in the rest of Hubei Province.

Proposals for future studies
The joint team recommends augmenting the mortality review by broadening the approach to include
other provinces where phylogenetic analyses (Figure 5, Molecular Epidemiology section) have revealed
early epidemic clusters, and comparison with other provinces and cities in China.

Clinical review of surveillance data and National Notifiable Disease Reporting System data
Review of reported cases of SARS-CoV-2 in December 2019 in Wuhan
Introduction
The outbreak of severe respiratory disease, subsequently determined to be due to infection with SARSCoV-2, was recognized by Chinese health workers towards the end of December 2019.(17, 18)
Searching for additional cases linked to this outbreak began immediately. The cases that were identified
with the earliest onset occurred in December 2019 and were reported to the National Notifiable Disease
Reporting System (NNDRS) and published. In order to investigate the origin of the outbreak, the clinical
and epidemiological features of these early cases were reviewed.
Methods
Data sources. The NNDRS was developed and implemented in China in the aftermath of the 2003
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic.(19) The existing paper-based disease-reporting
system was transformed into the NNDRS, a web-based system operated by the China CDC to facilitate
the complete and timely reporting of infectious diseases. The NNDRS allows for reporting of individual
cases from every hospital, township and upper-level primary healthcare clinic directly to the China
CDC. Before COVID-19 a total of 39 infections were notifiable as stipulated by the Law on the
Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases of China and included SARS. On 20 January 2020,
COVID-19 was officially defined as a Category B infectious disease but to apply measures for it as a
Category A infectious disease, namely to be reported to the NNDRS within two hours, albeit that review
and confirmation of suspected cases can take longer time at each administrative level of approval (for
example, municipal, district, provincial, national). As part of COVID-19 case review, only cases
considered sufficiently likely to warrant isolation (whether in hospital or elsewhere) were included in
the NNDRS and classified as either clinically diagnosed or laboratory confirmed.
Epidemiological investigation of all cases reported to NNDRS was carried out in the early months
following the onset of the outbreak to identify close contacts with, or at risk of, illness, and other
relevant exposures. Patients with diagnosed infection with SARS-CoV-2 were asked about close
contacts who had been ill in the two weeks prior to onset of illness in the index case.
A detailed description of the methods used to identify cases is provided in Annex E2. Further data and
analyses on the cases with links to the Huanan Market are provided in Annex E4. In view of the limited
41

time available during the joint mission in Wuhan in January and February 2021, these data have not yet
been analysed in depth by the joint team.
Case-definitions applied during the early phase of the epidemic in Wuhan in December 2019. The casedefinitions used have a major impact on the number and characteristics of cases identified. The early
case-definitions used are provided at Annex E3.
In the first days of the epidemic in Wuhan, cases were identified on the basis of clinical features,
including fever and acute respiratory symptoms, radiology and epidemiological features.
An association with the Huanan market was identified among some of the earliest recognized cases and,
for a short period until mid-January 2020, exposure to the Huanan market was included in the case
definition. It rapidly became clear, however, that there were cases without a link to the Huanan market,
and this element of the definition was dropped a few days after being introduced (Annex E3).
As the wider clinical spectrum of illness associated with infection became apparent, the case definition
was modified. When laboratory testing for either SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid or SARS-CoV-2-specific
serological markers became available mid-January 2020, results of such testing were added to the
definition, enabling an increasing number of cases to be designated as laboratory-confirmed, including
cases with onset before mid-January where specimens were available.

Clinical review of early cases conducted as part of Phase 1 studies
As part of the Phase 1 studies, a review was carried out of all cases reported as potential cases of
COVID-19 with onset in December 2019, including all cases that were accepted as formally notified
cases in the NNDRS system and other cases that were re-interviewed in December 2020 or January
2021.
Results
A total of 174 cases of COVID-19 were reported to the NNDRS with onset in December 2019: 100
were retrospectively laboratory-confirmed (by sequencing, NAT or serology) cases and a further 74
were clinically diagnosed cases (see Fig. 22). A detailed description of the cases is provided in Annex
E2. Other “cases” were identified as part of the search for other potential cases with onset in December
2019 (including some that were included in early publications). After clinical review by the Chinese
team, none of the other cases were considered to be compatible with COVID-19 disease, leaving only
the 174 notified cases.
The case with the earliest onset date reported to the NNDRS became ill on 8 December 2019. The
clinically diagnosed cases were generally reported in the second half of December with the first
clinically-diagnosed case having onset of illness on 16 December.

42

Fig. 22. Notified cases of COVID-19 (laboratory-confirmed and clinically diagnosed) in Wuhan
in December 2019 (n = 174).

There were a slightly more males (98) than females (76). The ages ranged from 22 to 92 years, median
age 56 years, with most cases in the working age groups up to 60 years. The age and gender profile of
the cases, and a comparison with the age and gender structure of the population of Wuhan, is given in
the Annex E2. In terms of occupation, 39% were “retired” and 35% were described as being engaged
in “business/commerce”.
Cases were scattered by place of residence across the city of Wuhan (164) with a further 10 in seven
neighbouring cities. There was a concentration of cases, both laboratory-confirmed and clinically
diagnosed, in the central districts (which include the Huanan market). The earliest cases were mostly
resident in the central districts of Wuhan, but cases began to appear in all districts of Wuhan in mid- to
late December 2019 (Fig. 23).

43

Fig. 23. Notified cases (confirmed and clinically diagnosed) with onset in December 2019 in
Wuhan (main figure), with China, Hubei province and areas adjacent to Wuhan shown for
context.

For those cases where the information was available, 55.4% had a history of recent exposure to a
market:28.0% to the Huanan market only, 22.6% to other markets only, and 4.8% to both. 44.6% had
no history of market exposure (see Fig. 24 and Annex E4). Cases with market exposure were more
evident among the early cases but exposure to other markets occurred in the earliest cases as much as
exposure to the Huanan market. The case reported with the earliest onset date (8 December) had no
history of exposure to the Huanan market.

44

Fig. 24. Exposure history of 168 of the 174 cases in December 2019 in Wuhan according to
association with any market.

Other exposures reported by patients included “dead animals”, which included meat and fish (26.4%),
live animals (11.8%), cold-chain products (26.4% - with a greater proportion among clinically
diagnosed cases), and travel outside Wuhan (8.9%) including one case with international travel (to
Thailand).
Seven clusters of cases, accounting for 15 cases in total, were identified among the 174 cases where
they reported close contact with others in the cluster at home, in a market or elsewhere. Detailed
description of the clusters is provided in Annex E2.
The cases who worked in the Huanan market were plotted in a timeline according to the location of
their stalls in the market. Most cases were associated with the western side of the market, but no clear
clustering with one specific part of the market was apparent as cases were widely distributed (see Fig.
25). A more detailed description of the association with the Huanan market of those cases who reported
links to the market is given in Annex E4. Detailed follow up of all products on the market is described
in the section on Animal and environment studies.

45

Fig. 25. Spatial distribution of vendor cases associated with the Huanan market by week of onset.

Other initially suspected cases in December 2019
Three possible cases with disease onset on 1, 2 and 7 December 2019, respectively, were initially
identified as potential cases in the retrospective case search and have been included in some published
papers. Clinical review of these three cases by the Chinese expert team led to their exclusion as possible
cases on the basis of the clinical features of their illness.
In the case with onset on 1 December, a 62-year-old man with past history of cerebrovascular disease
was judged to have had a minor respiratory illness in early December, which responded to antibiotics.
He developed a further illness with onset on 26 December 2019, which was later laboratory-confirmed
to be COVID-19. This patient had no reported contact to the Huanan market, whereas his wife, who
was admitted on 26 December with a COVID-19 compatible illness, reported close contact with the
Huanan market. She was also later laboratory-confirmed to have COVID-19. This couple, together with
their son, became part of the first recognized family cluster of COVID-19.
In the second case, a 34-year-old woman with onset on 2 December 2019 was assessed to have had
venous thromboembolic disease and subsequently pneumonia. She remained negative on SARS-CoV2 laboratory testing throughout a longer admission period ending in mid-February 2020.
In the third case, a 51-year-old man with onset on 7 December 2019 had symptoms of a cold and fever,
and chest X-ray changes (“thickness of texture of both lungs and stripes”). His blood neutrophil count
was raised and specific antibodies to Mycoplasma pneumoniae were detected. He responded well to
antibiotics. Blood collected in April 2020 was reported negative for SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies.

46

Conclusions and limitations
An explosive outbreak began in Wuhan in early December 2019. Only more severe cases with contact
with the healthcare system were recognized. Other milder (and asymptomatic) cases will have been
occurring at the same time as the recognized cases but no information is currently available on these
milder cases that could add to the epidemiological picture of the early outbreak.
Many of the early cases were associated with the Huanan market, but a similar number of cases were
associated with other markets and some were not associated with any markets. Transmission within the
wider community in December could account for cases not associated with the Huanan market which,
together with the presence of early cases not associated with that market, could suggest that the Huanan
market was not the original source of the outbreak. Milder cases that were not identified, however,
could provide the link between the Huanan Market and early cases without an apparent link to the
market. No firm conclusion therefore about the role of the Huanan Market can be drawn.
Recommendations
Limited time was available for a full joint review of the data provided in Annex E4 including analyses
of clinical and demographic characteristics, and risk factors, of the 174 notified cases. The joint
international team recommends that further work should include a full joint review of these data.
Consideration of re-interviewing these cases should be based on the findings of the joint review.
Acknowledging the constant progress in understanding the broad spectrum of COVID-19 disease over
time and the insight into mild and/or atypical clinical presentation of the infection, the joint team
recommends review of all NNDRS COVID-19 discarded cases (potential or confirmed) registered in
Wuhan during the weeks of December 2019 in the search for early cases.

Retrospective search for potential cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection in health institutions in
Wuhan from 1 October to 10 December 2019
Introduction
The full spectrum of the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection has now been recognized to range
from asymptomatic infection to severe acute respiratory illness and death.(20)
Severe cases represent the tip of the iceberg and for every severe infection identified, there will have
been many milder or asymptomatic infections. It is therefore possible that community transmission had
been occurring before the recognition of the explosive outbreak in Wuhan from the middle of December
2019 onwards, but had gone unrecognized owing to the mild and non-specific nature of the illness in
many; also, any earlier severe cases may not have been recognized as being potentially linked. Case
searching was therefore carried out in Wuhan in the period from 1 October to 10 December 2019 to see
if there were any suggestions of previously unrecognized illness due to SARS-CoV-2 infection
occurring in the community.

Methods
An initial case search, for the period 1–31 December 2019, was carried out in January 2021. Altogether
233 health institutions from 15 districts in Wuhan (consisting of all secondary and tertiary hospitals, as
well as a selection of community health centres) were contacted through a series of meetings with
representatives of the institutions and asked to identify all individuals who had attended those
institutions with illness with onset in December 2019 with one of four diagnoses: fever, influenza-like
illness (ILI), acute respiratory illness (ARI) and “pneumonia unspecified”. In January 2021, it was
47

agreed as part of the joint work plan for the WHO-China study to modify and extend the period for case
searching to cases presenting with illness between 1 October and 10 December 2019.
The 233 health institutions inspected their patient records systems to identify patients with the specified
four conditions. Each of the patient records identified were reviewed by a team from the health
institution. In the two hospitals which described this process in detail during meetings with the joint
team in Wuhan, the panel consisted of clinical representatives from respiratory and intensive care
medicine, imaging and pathology departments. This process varied, being tailored according to the size,
function and expertise of each of the participating institutions. Each institution then determined which
of these individual cases might possibly represent cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection. An external
multidisciplinary clinical panel then reviewed all the potential cases from these institutions. Those
identified were followed up and, where available, blood was obtained and tested for SARS-CoV-2specific antibodies in January 2021.

Results
In the period from 1 October to 10 December 2019, 76 253 episodes of fever, ILI, ARI or pneumonia
unspecified were presented to Wuhan health institutions by individuals of all ages and were reviewed.
Across this period, ARI was the most common diagnosis, followed by fever, ILI and pneumonia
unspecified.
A small increase in ILI, ARI and fever was seen in children in early December 2019 consistent with the
occurrence of influenza which was observed in the ILI surveillance system to be affecting mainly
children (Fig. 26).

Fig. 26. Distribution of 76 253 episodes of illness identified in the retrospective review, 1
October – 10 December 2019; total by age group; diagnostic category by each age group.

A rise in ARI in early December in the over-60-year age group was observed, together with smaller
rises in ILI and fever. Combined ARI, ILI, fever and pneumonia unspecified was higher in some central
and western districts of Wuhan throughout the period October to November.
48

Following review by the health institutions, only 92 cases of the 76 253 episodes were considered to
have an illness clinically compatible with SARS-CoV-2infection. These 92 were evenly distributed
across the period 1 October to 10 December (Fig. 27). Following further review by the external
multidisciplinary clinical team, all these cases were assessed not to be cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Fig. 27. Distribution of the 92 cases identified as potential cases of COVID-19 following review
of the 76 253 episodes of illness presenting from 1 October to 10 December, by date of onset.

The 92 cases were followed up in January 2021 and blood for SARS-CoV-2 serology collected from
67 of them (the remainder either having died, refused or were unobtainable). All 67 sera were reported
to be SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody negative.

Conclusions and limitations
The retrospective search for cases compatible with COVID-19 illness identified 76 253 episodes with
one of four indicator conditions. A rise in one of these conditions, ARI (as well as ILI and fever), was
seen in this group of individuals in the over-60-year age group in early December. The clinical
assessment of the 76 253 individuals revealed 92 cases clinically compatible with COVID-19. It is
possible that the application of stringent clinical criteria, resulting in the identification of only 92
clinically compatible cases, may have decreased the possibility of identifying a group or groups of cases
with milder illness.
All the 92 cases were rejected as cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection on further clinical review. None of
these cases (where blood could be obtained) was positive on SARS-CoV-2 serological testing carried
out more than 12 months later. The use of retrospective serological testing so long after the illness
cannot be relied on to exclude the possibility of SARS-CoV-2 infection at the time of the presenting
illness, given the possible drop in SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody over time and the associated reduced
sensitivity of commercial assays. The possibility that earlier transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection
was occurring in this community cannot be excluded on the basis of this evidence.

Recommendations
The joint international team recommended that further review be made of the methods used to identify
and characterise the cases in the retrospective clinical search for patients presenting with relevant
conditions to the 233 Wuhan medical institutions, including the 92 cases initially identified as being
49

compatible with a possible diagnosis of COVID-19, as well as others with potentially milder illness, to
search for features (such as clustering) that could be suggestive of occurrence of previously
unrecognized cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
In the light of the increase in ARI in older adults in early December 2019 in the retrospective review of
76 253 records (and the similar increase in ILI in Wuhan in the national sentinel surveillance data
described above) further joint review of the ARI data should be performed.
The team also recommends that further testing should be carried out on the 67 specimens obtained in
the retrospective clinical review and compared with retesting of a subsample of the 174 confirmed cases
from December 2019, and any other groups of specimens of relevance. This should be linked with
investigation of new approaches to serological testing using historic samples collected through the
blood bank.

Review of Stored Biological Samples Testing
As part of origins of SARS-CoV-2 study, searches for stored respiratory tract, serum or other samples
suitable for SARS-CoV-2 laboratory testing were requested. Sub-set of samples were identified and
tested from hospitalized patients related to scientific research projects, including patient samples
preserved in the biobank of Tongji Hospital, as well as patient samples preserved by the collaborative
research institute jointly developed by Wuhan University and Tongji Hospital of Huazhong University
of Science and Technology in late 2019.

Methods
Study 1. Tongji Hospital. Between July and December 2019, 2074 samples were collected; these
included 2058 plasma samples, 10 stool samples and six serum samples.
Testing for SARS-CoV-2-specific total antibody (using a Spike protein-based double antigen sandwich
assay) was performed on plasma and serum samples. Any sample with SARS-CoV-2-specific total
antibody underwent testing for SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG and IgM antibody, followed by confirmation
with neutralizing antibody and use of a colloidal gold antibody assay. For stool samples, RNA extraction
followed by NAT (Da'an Gene Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV Nucleic Acid Detection Kit) was
performed.
Testing was performed in January 2021.
Study 2. Tongji and other hospitals. Some 2334 throat swabs, the majority from children collected
between 1 October and 31 December 2019 from four branches of Tongji Hospital (Wuhan Tongji
Hospital, the Optics Valley branch, the Sino-French New City branch, and the Children's Hospital) were
tested by NAT for SARS-CoV-2 (Da'an Gene Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV Nucleic Acid Detection
Kit).
In addition, 218 throat swab samples collected between October and December 2019 from Wuhan
Union Hospital were tested for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid (Da'an Gene Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV
Nucleic Acid Detection Kit).
A further 106 samples (20 bronchoalveolar lavage and 11 throat swab samples and 75 sera) collected
between October 2019 and January 2020 from three hospitals in Hunan Province (the Second Xiangya
Hospital of Central South University, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, and
Hunan Children's Hospital) were tested for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid (Sansure Biotech Novel
Coronavirus Nucleic Acid Diagnostic Kit). Also, 16 samples (14 bronchoalveolar lavage samples and
two sera) collected between October and December 2019 from the First Affiliated Hospital of
50

Zhengzhou University in Henan province were similarly tested for SARS-CoV-2 (BioGerm Shanghai
Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV PCR Kit) and the two sera were also tested for SARS-CoV-2-specific
antibody test (Wondfo Biotech, Guangzhou Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV Antibody Colloidal Gold
Test Kit).

Results
Study 1. Plasma samples were collected from 205 patients with renal disease, 1702 patients with
gynaecological cancer, 128 from transplant recipients, and 10 from patients with nutritional disorders.
Sera was available from six patients with respiratory diseases. The 2051 plasma and sera samples were
collected from 192 males and 1858 females; one was of unknown gender. See Table 4 for the
distribution of samples.
All plasma and serum samples were negative for SARS-CoV-2-specific total antibody, including 479
patient samples from Wuhan. For thirteen samples too little sample material was available for testing.
No further testing was performed.
All 10 stool samples were SARS-CoV-2 NAT negative.

Table 4. Distribution of sources of sera and plasma by age, month of collection and location
(Hubei and other provinces).

Study 2. The distribution of sources of samples by age, month of collection and location (Wuhan and
elsewhere in Hubei and other provinces) is listed in Table 5. Samples were mostly from children.
51

All samples were reported SARS-CoV-2 negative on NAT and/or antibody testing3.

Table 5. Distribution of sources of samples by age, month of collection and location (Hubei and
other provinces).

Conclusions and recommendations
The joint international team concluded that no further work is required on the already-investigated
clinical samples collection as all laboratory results were negative. If possible, the National Health
Commission should continue to identify other biobanks for retrospective laboratory testing, particularly
in Wuhan.

Wuhan Blood Center presentation to the Epidemiology working group
Blood donor serosurveys for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies are used in many countries to understand
community prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 and monitor the increasing proportion of the population being
infected over time. The testing of convenience samples from research study biobanks did not provide
any indications of earlier circulation, but -given the outstanding questions and the potential for limited

3

SARS-CoV-2 NAT and serological assays used worldwide, especially early in the pandemic, may be
accompanied by limited data on assay performance. International Quality Assurance and Harmonization panels
are under development.

52

clusters that would not be detected through the studies done so far, access to systematically collected
historic samples would be of great added value for the origins studies. Therefore, the international team
invited representatives of the Wuhan Blood Center for discussions. The Wuhan Blood Center has
provided a community-based blood donation service for people aged between 18-60 years of age, and
operates under national regulations for storage, privacy and re-testing (in the case of disputes).

Methods
Presentations were given by Professors Wang Yan (Director) and Zhao Lei.

Results
In 2020, during the pandemic in Wuhan, and as expected, blood donations dropped. Methods to increase
donations through on-line appointments and other systems were introduced. Whole blood donors donate
up to every six months and about 15% are regular donors. Donors for other blood products may donate
more regularly.
About 200 000 donations are made annually in Wuhan. Blood donor aliquot portions (about 0.5 ml in
blood pack tubing) are stored for two years.
SARS-CoV-2 antibody testing is available in the Centre, and the Centre has published its findings on
SARS-CoV-2 seropositivity in donations during the pandemic in Wuhan (seroprevalence of 2.2%
reported from Wuhan in donations received between January and April 2020) and Hubei and other
provinces.(21)
The Blood Centre has also been involved in COVID-19 convalescent plasma collection and trials.

Further work and recommendations
The Wuhan Blood Centre offers the opportunity to undertake a serosurvey for SARS-CoV-2 in blood
donors in the latter part of 2019. The joint international team recommended the investigation of options
for performing SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody testing in blood donors (including those who are regular
donors) in Wuhan from September to December 2019, within the context of the appropriate local and
national regulatory, scientific and ethics approval. This could be expanded to include other blood
centres in China and other locations world-wide, focusing on the six months (at least 3-4 months) period
before the first cases in each location were identified and ideally using a common laboratory testing
approach. Contemporary samples from blood donor populations in other regions of China where
COVID-19 cases were not detected before the early months of 2020 could be used as a control group.

Summary and recommendations
The joint international team concluded that:
Morbidity surveillance, pharmacy purchases and mass gatherings
1. Based on the national sentinel surveillance data for ILI, and the associated laboratoryconfirmed influenza activity, in Wuhan as well as Hubei and six surrounding provinces, there
is a marked increase in ILI in both children and adults at the end of 2019 in Wuhan. This may
be explained by a contemporary increase in laboratory-confirmed influenza activity but
whereas the data provided no evidence for substantial SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the months
preceding the outbreak in December 2019, sporadic transmission or minor clusters of SARSCoV-2 cannot be ruled out.
53

2. Analysis of aggregated retail pharmacy purchases for antipyretics, and cough and cold
medications did not provide a useful indicator of early SARS-CoV-2 activity in the
community.
3. No appreciable signals of clusters of fever or severe respiratory disease requiring
hospitalization were identified in association with mass gatherings during September to
December 2019.
Mortality surveillance
4. During the period August-December 2019, review of all-cause and pneumonia-specific
mortality data provided little evidence of any unexpected fluctuations that might suggest the
occurrence of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the population in the period before December
2019. This does not exclude, however, the possibility that some circulation of SARS-CoV-2
was occurring in the population at a low level, as changes in mortality at the population level
would be unlikely to be sufficiently sensitive to detect this.
5. In view of the time lag from onset of disease to COVID-19-associated death, the documented
rapid increase in all-cause mortality in week 3 of 2020 and pneumonia-specific deaths in week
4, suggest that virus transmission was widespread among the population of Wuhan by the first
week of 2020. The steep increase in mortality occurred 1-2 weeks later among the population
in the Hubei Province outside Wuhan, suggesting that the epidemic in Wuhan predated the
spread in the rest of Hubei Province.
Identification of early cases and role of Huanan Market among early cases
6. An explosive outbreak began in Wuhan in early December 2019. Only more severe cases with
contact with the healthcare system were recognized. Other milder (and asymptomatic) cases
will have been occurring at the same time as the recognized cases but no information is
currently available on these milder cases that could add to the epidemiological picture of the
early outbreak.
7. Many of the early cases were associated with the Huanan market, but a similar number of cases
were associated with other markets and some were not associated with any markets.
Transmission within the wider community in December could account for cases not associated
with the Huanan market which, together with the presence of early cases not associated with
that market, could suggest that the Huanan market was not the original source of the outbreak.
8. Other milder cases that were not identified, however, could provide the link between the
Huanan Market and early cases without an apparent link to the market. No firm conclusion
therefore about the role of the Huanan Market can be drawn.
Case-searching
9. The retrospective search for cases compatible with COVID-19 illness identified 76 253
episodes with one of four indicator conditions. A rise in one of these conditions, ARI (as well
as ILI and fever), was seen in this group of individuals in the over-60-year age group in early
December. The clinical assessment of the 76 253 individuals revealed 92 cases clinically
compatible with COVID-19. It is possible that the clinical review, resulting in the identification
of only 92 clinically compatible cases, may have decreased the possibility of identifying a
group or groups of cases with milder illness.
10. All 92 cases identified by the clinical retrospective review of morbidity surveillance episodes
were rejected as cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection on further clinical review. None of these cases
(where blood could be obtained) was positive on SARS-CoV-2 serological testing performed
on samples collected more than 12 months later. The use of retrospective serological testing so
long after the illness cannot be relied on to exclude the possibility of SARS-CoV-2 infection at
the time of the presenting illness, given the possible drop in SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody
over time and the associated reduced sensitivity of commercial assays. The possibility that
54

earlier transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection was occurring in this community cannot be
excluded on the basis of this evidence.
Laboratory testing
11. Blood donor screening surveys for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies are used in many countries to
understand community prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 and monitor the increasing proportion of
the population being infected over time. The Wuhan Blood Centre offers the opportunity to
undertake a serosurvey for SARS-CoV-2 in blood donors in the latter part of 2019.
12. Testing of convenience samples collected in 2019 from research study biobanks did not provide
any indication of earlier SARS-CoV-2 circulation.
13. Given the outstanding questions and the potential for limited clusters that would not be detected
through the studies done so far, access to systematically collected historic samples, including
routinely stored blood bank samples, would be of great added value for the origins studies.

Recommendations
The joint international team made the following recommendations:
Morbidity surveillance, pharmacy purchase and mass gathering events
1. The joint team recommends further exploration of the weekly ILI trends (especially in adults)
in 2019, in comparison to the earlier years, using time-series analyses.
2. The joint team recommends a review of pharmacy purchases by week during the period of
September to December in 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019 to look for any signals of increased
purchases in the weeks of September to December 2019 as compared with the same weeks
during the previous years. If any signals are identified then proceed with analyses for spatialtemporal clusters.
3. The joint team recommends that consideration be given to further joint review of the data on
respiratory illness from the on-site clinics at the Military Games in October 2019.
Mortality surveillance
4. The joint team recommends augmenting the mortality review by broadening the approach to
include other provinces where phylogenetic analyses (Figure 5, Molecular Epidemiology
section) have revealed early epidemic clusters, and comparison with other provinces and cities
in China.
Identification of early cases and role of Huanan Market among early cases
5. The joint team recommends that further testing of the 67 specimens obtained in the
retrospective clinical review of the 92 cases identified by the clinical retrospective review be
carried out and compared with retesting of a subsample of the 174 confirmed cases from
December 2019, and any other groups of specimens of relevance. This should be linked with
investigation of new approaches to serological testing using historic samples collected through
the blood bank.
6. In view of the limited time available during the visit to Wuhan in January and February 2021,
further joint review (including of the data and analyses in Annex E4) should be carried out,
including analyses of clinical and demographic characteristics, as well as risk factors, of the
174 notified cases. Consideration of re-interviewing these cases should be based on the
findings of the joint review.
Case-searching
55

7. The joint team recommends further review of the methods used to identify and characterise the
cases in the retrospective clinical search for patients presenting with relevant conditions to the
233 Wuhan medical institutions, to search for features (such as clustering) that could be
suggestive of occurrence of previously unrecognized cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
8. This review should include the 92 cases initially identified as being compatible with a possible
COVID-19 diagnosis, as well as other cases with potentially milder illness.
9. It should also include the increase in ARI in older adults in late 2019, seen in the retrospective
search from the 233 Wuhan medical institutions.
Acknowledging the constant progress in understanding the broad spectrum of COVID-19
illness over time and the insight into mild and/or atypical clinical presentation of the infection,
the joint team recommends review of all NNDRS COVID-19 discarded cases (potential or
confirmed) registered in Wuhan city during the weeks of December 2019 in the search for early
cases.
Laboratory testing
10. No further work is required on the convenience clinical sample collection already investigated,
as all SARS-CoV-2-specific laboratory results were negative.
11. The joint team recommends a collaborative study with the Wuhan Blood Centre for the
presence of SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies in blood samples from adult blood donors in
Wuhan collected during the months of September to December 2019, and further back in time
until there are two successive months without any evidence of SARS-CoV-2-specific
antibodies among the tested samples. This could be expanded to include other blood centres in
China and other locations world-wide, focusing on the six months (at least 3-4 months) period
before the first cases in each location were identified and ideally using a common laboratory
testing approach. Contemporary samples from blood donor populations in other regions of
China where COVID-19 cases were not detected before the early months of 2020 could serve
as a control group.
12. The joint team recommends investigation of new approaches to serological testing to revisit
testing performed from cases initially identified in the retrospective clinical review, the early
confirmed cases and any other groups of interest. There may be potential for international
collaboration on such work.
References
(1)
Huang CL, Wang YM, Li XW, Ren LL, Zhao JP, Hu Y et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet, 2020; 395:497-506.
(2)
Clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 Infection. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelines. National Institutes of Health (available
at https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/, accessed 28 February 2021).
(3)
Sakurai A, Sasaki T, Kato S, Hayashi M, Tsuzuki S-I, Ishihara T, et al. Natural history of
asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. N Engl J Med. 2020;10.1056/NEJMc2013020.
(4)
Byambasuren O, Cardona M, Bell K, Clark J, McLaws M-L, Glasziou P. Estimating the Extent
of True Asymptomatic COVID-19 and Its Potential for Community Transmission: Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis (pre-print). MedRxiv. 2020 doi: 10.1101/2020.05.10.20097543.
(5)
Chowdhury SD, Oommen AM. Epidemiology of COVID-19. J Digest Endosc 2020; 11:3-7.
(6)
Li L, Liu YN, Wu P, Peng ZB, Chen T et al. Influenza-associated excess respiratory mortality
in China, 2010-15: a population-based study. The Lancet Public Health, 2019; 4(9):E473-E481.
(7)
Li L, Liu YM, Wu P, Peng ZB, Wang XL, Chen T et al. The Lancet Public Health, 2019;
4(9):E473-E481 and Huo X, Zhu FC. Influenza surveillance in China: a big jump, but further to go. The
Lancet Public Health, 2019; 4(9):E436-E437.
(8)
Feng D, de Vlas SJ, Fang LQ, Han XN, Zhao WJ, Sheng S, et al. The SARS epidemic in
mainland China: bringing together all epidemiological data. Trop Med Int Health. 2009 Nov;14 Suppl
56

1(Suppl 1):4-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3156.2008.02145.x. Epub 2009 Jun 5. PMID: 19508441; PMCID:
PMC7169858.
(9)
Yu HJ, Huang JG, Huai Y, Guan XH, Klena JD, Liu SL et al. The substantial hospitalization
burden of influenza in central China: surveillance for severe, acute respiratory infection, and influenza
viruses, 2010-2012. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses 8(1): doi 10.1111/irv.12205.
(10)
Kong W-H et al. SARS-CoV-2 detections in patients with influenza-like illness. Nature
Microbiology 2020 May;5(5):675-678.
(11)
Pivette M, Mueller JE, Crépey P et al. Drug sales data analysis for outbreak detection of
infectious diseases: a systematic literature review. BMC Infect Dis 2014; 14, 604.
(https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-014-0604-2, accessed 3 March 2021).
(12)
Liu S, Wu X, Lopez AD, et al. An integrated national mortality surveillance system for death
registration and mortality surveillance, China. Bull World Health Organ. 2016; 94(1):46-57.
(13)
Rossen LM, Branum AM, Ahmad FB, Sutton P, Anderson RN. Excess deaths associated with
COVID-19, by age and race and ethnicity - United States, January 26-October 3, 2020. Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report. 2020; 69(42):1522-1527.
(14)
Noufaily A, Enki DG, Farrington P, Garthwaite P, Andrews N, Charlett A. An improved
algorithm for outbreak detection in multiple surveillance systems. Stat Med. 2013; 32(7):1206-1222.
(15)
Höhle M. Surveillance: A R package for the monitoring of infectious diseases. Computational
Statistics. 2007; 22(4):571.
(16)
Bai J, Shi F, Cao J et al. The epidemiological characteristics of deaths with COVID-19 in the
early stage of epidemic in Wuhan, China. Global Health Research and Policy 2020; 5, 54
(https://ghrp.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s41256-020-00183-y, accessed 18 February 2021).
(17)
Huang C et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
China. Lancet 2020; 395: 497-506.
(18)
Qun Li et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected
pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 1199-207.
(19)
Jia P, Yang SJ. China needs a national syndromic surveillance system. Nature Medicine, 2020;
26:990 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0921-5.
(20)
Clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 Infection. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines Panel.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment Guidelines. National Institutes of Health (available
at https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/, accessed 28 February 2021).
(21)
Chang L et al. The prevalence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 among blood donors in China.
medRxiv 2020.07.13.20153106; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.13.20153106.

57

MOLECULAR EPIDEMIOLOGY
Most emerging viruses originate from animals. Understanding the process that may lead to a crossspecies transmission event, also known as “spillover”, and global spread requires a deep understanding
of both the virus diversity and evolution in an animal reservoir, the interactions between animals, their
environment and humans, and the factors contributing to efficient human to human transmission. A
virus causing a global pandemic must be highly adaptive to human environments. Such adaptation may
be gained suddenly or may have been evolving through multiple steps with each step driven by natural
selection.
The search for the origin of SARS-CoV-2 therefore needs to focus on two phases.(1) The first phase
involves viral circulation in animal hosts (such as bat, pangolin, mink or other wild animals) before
zoonotic transfer. During this evolutionary process, various animal species may serve as reservoir hosts.
Upon circulation, SARS-CoV-2 progenitor strains may have acquired increased ability to infect
humans. Finding viral sequences nearly identical to SARS-CoV-2 helps the elucidation of the origin of
SARS-CoV-2 from zoonotic transmissions from intermediate host species.
The second phase involves radiative evolution of SARS-CoV-2 during its global spread in human
populations following zoonotic transfer. Animal--human contacts permit a progenitor of SARS-CoV-2
to switch its host to humans, and the likelihood of such spillovers increases with the frequency, nature
and intensity of contact.(2) Spillovers may have occurred repeatedly, if the genomic features of the
virus in the reservoir require further adaptation for efficient onward transmission, and such early
spillovers may go undetected. In addition, the evolution or spillover of viruses with pandemic potential
may have resulted in substantial clusters in different geographical regions before factors converged and
led to the pandemic of COVID-19. Therefore, studies into the origin need to be designed bearing in
mind these different potential emergence scenarios.
Evidence from surveys and targeted studies so far have found most highly related viruses in bats and
pangolins, suggesting they may be the reservoir of SARS-CoV-2 according to the high sequence
similarity between the sampled viruses and SARS-CoV-2. Viruses identified so far from neither bats
nor pangolins are sufficiently similar to SARS-CoV-2 to serve as the direct progenitor of SARS-CoV2.(3) In addition to these findings, the high susceptibility of mink and cats suggests the potential of
additional species of animals (belonging to the mustelid or felid family, as well as other species) as
potential reservoirs.(4-7) Surveys of virus presence and genetic diversity in potential reservoir species
have not been systematic, and potential reservoir hosts are massively under-sampled.

Background on molecular epidemiology
The use of pathogen genomic sequencing has become standard in outbreak investigations and pathogen
surveillance and has provided deep insights into the evolution of emerging disease outbreaks.(8,9) The
scale of the global sequencing efforts since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic is unprecedented. For
instance, very limited full genome sequencing was done during the previous pandemic, caused by 2009
pandemic influenza A virus (H1N1). Mostly targeted sequencing of part of the genome was performed
on a Sanger sequencing platform with sequencing of a single DNA fragment at a time. In contrast,
implementation of next-generation sequencing platforms during the past decade allowing for
sequencing of millions of fragments per run has granted genomic sequencing a pivotal role in SARSCoV-2 surveillance from the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.(10-13) The first publications used
genomic sequencing to characterize the novel virus and provided the first phylogenetic analysis linking

58

the virus to the genus Betacoronavirus and the lineage Sarbecovirus. 4 Other sarbecoviruses are the
viruses that cause SARS and a diverse group of SARS-like coronaviruses identified through surveys of
bats mostly conducted following the SARS outbreak.(12,13) As part of the initial characterization,
SARS-CoV-2 was isolated from clinical specimens from the first recognized cases, and the association
of this virus with the disease was confirmed through antibody testing (13).
Since the start of the pandemic, viral genome sequences have been collected through GISAID5 (the
global platform that evolved from a global initiative on sharing avian influenza data), which can be
accessed by scientists and epidemiologists. With the global dispersal of the virus, the accumulation of
mutations has been monitored systematically through bioinformatic analyses. The underlying principle
is that virus genomes accumulate mutations during replication. Therefore, with increasing rounds of
infection, the accumulated pattern of mutations can be used to track transmission chains.
In addition to the use of genomic sequencing to characterize the new virus and track global dispersal,
more granular use of whole genome sequencing has been used throughout the pandemic to track the
spread of SARS-CoV-2 and to gain a deeper understanding of suspected clusters identified through
epidemiological outbreak investigations. For this, it is essential to combine the genomic data with
information from the epidemiological investigation,(6,14) like time and place of illness onset and case
history.(8) Genomic epidemiological analyses have now been widely used to resolve clusters.(14-17)
Phylogenetic and network analyses can provide insights into the spatial and temporal dynamics of virus
circulation. Combined with epidemiological and geographical information, phylogeny or haplotype
network analysis based on sequence similarity among viral genomic sequences allows the
reconstruction of evolutionary history of virus lineages, and can be applied to the analysis of various
questions relevant to the studies into virus origin, including: (i) estimation of the number of independent
virus founders during the early outbreak of the pandemic; (ii) inference of the population dynamics of
virus; (iii) inference of the rates of viral spread; (iv) identification of the existence of infection clusters;
and (v) tracing the transmission chains of resurgence (see Fig. 1).(18)
The accumulation of mutations has also been used to estimate time to the most recent common ancestor
(tMRCA) of the new coronavirus.(19) There are numerous methods to estimate the tMRCA, but for
viral pathogens establishing the timescale of viral evolution relies on determining or using accurately
the rate of nucleotide substitution. This rate and known dates of virus isolation from hosts allows for
the back calculation of the time when the current viruses or viral clades shared a common ancestor.
There are numerous biological and statistical complexities that exist and can be accounted for, and so
different methods, from the initial sequencing through to sequence alignment to methods of tMRCA
estimation, can give differing results.

4

SARS-CoV-2 is a virus of the severe acute respiratory syndrome–related coronavirus species, in the subgenus Sarbecovirus
and the genus Betacoronavirus, along with three other viruses. Coronaviruses are positive-sense, single-stranded RNA
viruses, in the family Coronaviridae. Formally in virology a strain refers to a cell culture isolate.
5
Available at https://www.gisaid.org(accessed 25 March 2021).

59

Fig. 1. Examples of molecular epidemiological analyses (modified, based on Martin et al.(18))
(TMRCA: time to the most recent common ancestor)

60

1. Approach
The list of studies was addressed through a combination of plenary and workgroup specific meetings
and studies. The working group on molecular epidemiology focused on unlocking the potential
information from virus genomic data combined with metadata for the questions related to the origins
study. In order to do so, first, an overview was made of the globally available public data and the
research support database efforts developed in China to aggregate all SARS-CoV-2 genomic data.
During all visits and team discussions the potential availability of additional stored samples was
explored in order to identify additional samples accessible for sequencing. Unpublished genomic data
were aggregated from ongoing research. For analysis of the earliest phase of the pandemic, sequence
providers were contacted to link data to cases in the national registry from China CDC to establish time
of illness onset. Raw sequence data were re-analysed to resolve differences between genomic sequences
generated by different groups. The data for cases with onset of illness in December 2019 were used for
final analysis in combination with data on exposure histories from the questionnaires used as a part of
the outbreak investigation.

2. Overview of global databases of SARS-CoV-2
2.1 International databases
2.1.1 The GISAID platform
The GISAID initiative is dedicated to providing a rapid data-sharing platform that includes a large
proportion of publicly available genomic data on influenza viruses and SARS-CoV-2. GISAID provides
data on human-associated viral genome sequences and some related clinical and epidemiological data,
as well as data on animal-associated viruses. On 10 January 2020, the first SARS-CoV-2 genomes were
made publicly available on GenBank and Virological.org (10) and on GISAID. To date (6 February
2021), GISAID has recorded a total of 487 487 SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences from 238 countries
and regions, as well as the metadata information corresponding to the sequences.
2.1.2 The International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration
The International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration is an initiative between three
organizations which since the 1980s has been providing support for molecular biology and genomics
research: the NCBI, EMBL-EBI and DDBJ (see below). Through the agreement, the individual regional
databases exchange released data on a daily basis. As a consequence, the three data centres share
virtually the same data at any given time. The virtually unified database is called the International
Nucleotide Sequence Database (INSD). The individual organizations have developed dedicated
websites and data repositories specifically for COVID-19.
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
The National Center for Biotechnology Information provides access to a wide range of bioinformatics
resources from programmes funded by the United States National Institutes of Health and other public
data. It includes the sequence database GenBank and a repository for high-throughput sequencing data.
For COVID-19, a dedicated website6 was developed, providing access to SARS-CoV-2 sequences, raw
reads, and publications listed in PubMed.
The European Molecular Biology Laboratory’s European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)
The EMBL-EBI is Europe-based support infrastructure for the life sciences. For sequence data, the
European Nucleotide Archive was founded in the early 1980s. In April 2020, the European Commission

6

National Center for Biotechnology Information, available at https://www.ncbi.nlm(accessed 25 March 2021).

61

launched the COVID-19 Data Portal,7 which includes the repository based in the Archive for raw reads
and assembled sequences.
The DNA Database of Japan (DDBJ)
The DDBJ Center is a Japanese research support database, also providing specific information and
resources for COVID-19.8
2.1.3 Nomenclature
Nomenclature systems have been developed to assign names to the diversifying lineages.(20,
https://nextstrain.org9 and GISAID, reviewed in 20a) The earliest sequences from Wuhan have been
designated as lineage A (represented by Wuhan/WH04/2020; sampled 5 January 2020; GISAID
accession EPI_ISL_406801) and B (represented by Wuhan-Hu-1; sampled 31 December 2019;
GenBank accession no. MN908947) respectively, and phylogenetic analysis has been used to track
changes. Subsequent lineages were assigned a number, for instance B1, B2 and so on, or letters,
depending on the system used. To make tracking of strains accessible for providers of genetic data,
GISAID collaborated with bioinformaticians using interactive visualization software that provides
rough overviews of the distribution of virus lineages across the world (Fig. 2). Currently, at least 12
Nextstrain clades are recognized globally. There is a clear need for development of a consistent system
for nomenclature.

7

COVID-19 Data Portal - accelerating scientific research through data, available at https://www.covid19portal.org, (accessed
25 March 2021)
8
Available at https://biosciencedbc.jp/blog/20200303-01.html [in Japanese] (accessed 25 March 2021).
9
Nextstrain, available at https://nextstrain.org (accessed 25 March 2021).

62

Fig. 2. Radial phylogenetic tree showing current grouping of SARS-CoV-2 clades through
Nextstrain visualization analysis of data submitted to GISAID. Original viruses from the early
pandemic are depicted in blue in the lower left quadrant (Clade 19A and B).10
2.2 Databases related to SARS-CoV-2 in China
To better understand the spread of SARS-CoV-2, researchers in China have constructed three important
resources (Table 1): (1) the 2019nCoVR (19, 21,21a); 11 (2) the Novel Coronavirus National Science
and Technology Resource Service System; 12 and (3) a mirror site of GISAID EpiCoV™ Database.13
The Novel Coronavirus National Science and Technology Resource Service System, developed by
National Microbiology Data Centre (NMDC),(22) released the first electron microscope photograph of
SARS-CoV-2. Also, it provides a part of public sequencing data submitted by Chinese researchers. The
mirror site of GISAID EpiCoV™ Database (named VirusDIP), maintained by China National Gene
Bank, (23) provides metadata information on SARS-CoV-2, and the related reports of primary data
analysis.

Table 1. Comparison of content and functionalities of the three database repositories in China.

10

Available at https://nextstrain.org/ncov/global?c=GISAID_clade (accessed 25 March 2021).
Available at https://bigd.big.ac.cn/ncov/ (accessed 18 February 2021).
12
Available at http://nmdc.cn/nCov/en (accessed 18 February 2021).
13
Available at https://db.cngb.org/gisaid/ (accessed 18 February 2021).
11

63

The 2019nCoVR database, developed by the National Genomics Data Centre, China National Centre
for Bioinformation (CNCB),14 serves as a database for global data submission and access, and integrates
SARS-CoV-2 genome data and metadata accessible from GISAID, National Centre for Biotechnology
Information, National Genomics Data Centre and the National Microbiology Data Centre on SARSCoV-2. It was developed to include quality control of the sequencing data, and provide support for
scientists in China and elsewhere through tools for analysis of variations and dynamic trends, haplotype
networks, and browsing functionality through GenBrowser. 15 The present version aims to remove
redundancy between databases, evaluates data integrity and sequencing quality through manual curation
and automated quality assessment. A functionality that allows mapping of genome variation from highquality genome sequences provides a dynamic landscape of SARS-CoV-2 genome variation worldwide.
In order to track and identify the genome variations of SARS-CoV-2 temporally, it provides the
visualization of the dynamic changes in time and space of each mutation and constructs the dynamic
evolution map of the virus haplotype network during the outbreak.
As of 4 February 2021, the database has integrated 437 808 non-redundant sequences, of which 2089
are released from China. For the studies related to the origins study, the focus was on early sequences,
released in December 2019 and January 2020. There are 768 global early sequences (defined as before
31 January 2020) from 26 countries and 514 Chinese early sequences. For each SARS-CoV-2 sequence,
the following five categories of information are established:
•

•
•
•
•

the meta-information of the genome sequence, including sampling time, sampling location, host
information, submission time, submission unit, and sample source unit; all meta-information
can be downloaded in bulk, and the genome sequence is linked to different database sources
and can be downloaded on the link page
the results of the completeness and quality evaluation of the genome sequence
when available: raw sequencing data and related information, including sequencing platform,
sequencing volume, analysis software and methods
when available: epidemiological information, including name, age, sex, date of onset of illness,
contact with the Huanan market, death, and clinical symptoms
variation analysis, including the location and type of mutations and functional annotation.
2.2.1 Overview of genomic data on SARS-CoV-2 in China

The 2019nCoVR database has integrated 2089 non-redundant sequences (by 3 February 2021) from 17
provinces and regions of China (see Fig. 3). Of these, 2028 sequences were collected from human cases
(Table 2), 28 sequences were collected from the environment (Table 3), and 33 sequences were from
possible animal hosts (pangolin and bat), from pets (cats and dogs) or from animal experiments (mouse
and hamster). All these sequences are publicly accessible.

14
15

Available at https://bigstory.big.ac.cn/ncov/ (accessed 18 February 2021).
Available at https://www.biosino.org/genbrowser/ (accessed 22 February 2021).

64

Fig. 3. Map of the distribution of released genome data in China.

Table 2. Summary of genome sequences in China (host is human, as of 3 February 2021).
Year

Month

Complete

Partial

2019
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2020
2021
Other

12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1

25
407
401
411
80
3
11
89
18
34
34
12
24
16
6
1571

3
59
126
43
52
5
6
91
34
24
16

Total

Confirmed
cases a
27b
11 794
68 147
2663
1754
203
644
2890
2280
659
860
1656
3185
4212

27
486
2057

100 974

a

The numbers are based on the data from National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China,
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/list_gzbd.shtml
b
Health Commission of Hubei Province, http://wjw.hubei.gov.cn/bmdt/dtyw/201912/t20191231_1822343.shtml

Based on the number of confirmed cases and early sequences as of 31 January 2020, the cumulative
number of confirmed human cases was 11 821, the number of sequenced cases was 494, and the
proportion of confirmed cases from December and January that have been sequenced is about 4.18%
(494/11 821).
65

Table 3. Summary of genome sequences from environmental samples, collected in China (as at 3
February 2021).
Accession ID

Data
source

Sequence
length

Sample
collection
date

Location
China / Hubei /
Wuhan
China / Hubei /
Wuhan
China / Hubei /
Wuhan
China / Hubei /
Wuhan
China / Hubei /
Wuhan
China /
Shandong /
Linyi
China /
Shandong /
Linyi

NMDC60013072-01

NMDC

1065

2020-01-01

NMDC60013070-01

NMDC

28 557

2020-01-01

NMDC60013071-01

NMDC

25 342

2020-01-01

NMDC60013073-01

NMDC

29 891

2020-01-01

NMDC60013074-01

NMDC

29 891

2020-01-01

EPI_ISL_412425

GISAID

321

2020-01-26

EPI_ISL_412426

GISAID

321

2020-01-26

EPI_ISL_430743

GISAID

29 782

2020-03-14

China / Beijing

EPI_ISL_430744

GISAID

29 778

2020-03-14

China / Beijing

EPI_ISL_430745

GISAID

29 732

2020-03-14

China / Beijing

EPI_ISL_430746

GISAID

29 782

2020-03-14

China / Beijing

EPI_ISL_469256

GISAID

29 903

2020-06-11

China / Beijing

GWHANPA01000001

Genome
Warehouse

29 858

2020-06-12

China / Beijing

MT911467

GenBank

1324

2020-08-14

China

MT911468

GenBank

1868

2020-08-14

China

MT911469

GenBank

1215

2020-08-14

China

MT911470

GenBank

1319

2020-08-14

China

MT911471

GenBank

1612

2020-08-14

China

EPI_ISL_591272

GISAID

29 893

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591273

GISAID

29 873

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591274

GISAID

29 869

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591275

GISAID

29 873

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

66

Isolation
source
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

NA
Environmental
swab
Environmental
swab
Environmental
swab
Environmental
swab
Environmental
swab
NA
Seafood
packaging
Seafood
packaging
Seafood
packaging
Seafood
packaging
Seafood
packaging
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of

EPI_ISL_591276

GISAID

29 869

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591277

GISAID

29 873

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591278

GISAID

29 876

2020-09-24

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591279

GISAID

29 888

2020-09-27

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_591280

GISAID

29 888

2020-10-07

China /
Shandong /
Qingdao

EPI_ISL_733568

GISAID

29 782

2020-12-10

China / Hong
Kong SAR

cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
Outer
packaging of
cold-chain
products
isolated from
Vero cells
NA

Among 28 environmental sequences, samples in Wuhan were collected during environmental
surveillance of the Huanan market, samples from Qingdao were collected from surveys of cold-chain
packaging, samples in Linyi were from seafood packaging, and samples from Beijing were
environmental swabs collected from the Xinfadi Market (Table 3).
3. Overview of the sequences of early cases, global overview
To learn more about the initial phase of the pandemic, the 2019nCoVR database was searched for
presence of SARS-CoV-2 (or related) genomic data from the first two months in which cases were
identified (8 December 2019 – 31 January 2021, by date of sample collection). The joint international
team identified a total of 768 sequences globally (Table 4), including 538 from China (Table 4) and 94
of them were from Hubei Province. These data were used as input for haplotype network analyses to
visualize the global diversity of sequences in these first two months (section 3.1 and Fig. 4) and for
more detailed analysis focusing on the early China data (section 3.2).
3.1 Global analysis of early cases of SARS-CoV-2 genomes
The global haplotype network analysis included 348 early SAR-CoV-2 sequences with high quality and
clear sampling location information from China and 142 early high-quality sequences published abroad.
Two major sequence clusters were observed (Fig. 4), as has been reported in previous studies.(24, 24a)
These clusters have been designated as lineages S/L or A/B, depending on the nomenclature used, and
are defined based on a set of two lineage-defining single nucleotide polymorphisms at sites 8782 and
28 144 that have nearly complete linkage.(12, 20, 24-29) When and where these two sublineages
diverged remains unclear, and these analyses indicate the origins of SARS-CoV-2 are not yet fully
understood. Among the sequences analysed here, the first available sequence for lineage A (also
referred to as lineage S) is Wuhan/WH04/2020 (EPI_ISL_406801), and these viruses share two
nucleotide polymorphisms (positions 8782 in ORF1ab and 28 144 in ORF8) with the closest known bat
viruses (RaTG13 and RmYN02). Different nucleotides are present at those sites in viruses assigned to
lineage B (also referred to as lineage L), of which Wuhan-Hu-1 (GenBank accession no. MN908947)
67

sampled on 26 December 2019 is an early representative. Evolutionary analyses (20, 30) have suggested
that the lineage A sequence might represent the ancestral form and lineage B might be the derived form.
Hence, although viruses from lineage B happen to have been sequenced and published first, according
to Rambaut et al.(20) it is likely (based on current data) that the most recent common ancestor of the
SARS-CoV-2 phylogeny shares the same genome sequence as the early lineage A sequences (for
example, Wuhan/WH04/2020). However, the issue of different early lineages has been widely
discussed, but there is no consensus on the question of which viruses are older, as evidenced in
discussions in writing following the paper published by Foster et al.(30)

Table 4. Weekly summary of SARS-CoV-2 genomes of early cases and environmental samples
globally for end-2019 and beginning 2020.
Sample collection date (by year and by week)
2019
Country

49

2020
50

51

China
Italy

1*

52

53

1

2

3

4

5

2

26

12

9

25

178

286

3*

1

9

Mexico

3

Thailand

9

4

6

11

Spain

1

6

6

7

7

30

21

7

9

11

Czech Republic

1

United States of America

5

Australia
Cambodia

1

Canada

4

Finland

2

France

3

5

Germany

7

India

4

Japan

1

5

5

Luxembourg

1
6

3

Philippines

1

5

Singapore

4

Republic of Korea

1

Malaysia
Nepal

1

Sri Lanka

1

68

Sweden

1

United Arab Emirates

2

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

4

Viet Nam

3

* These are partial genome sequences submitted from early reports from Italy.

69

2

Fig. 4. Haplotype network of 490 complete and high quality early genome sequences globally (Amarked by countries; B- marked by sampling date). The haplotype network was inferred from
all identified haplotypes using PopART. SARS-CoV-2 haplotypes were constructed on the basis
of short pseudo-sequences that consist of all variants (filtering out variations located in UTR
regions). Then, all these pseudo-sequences were clustered into groups, and each group (a
haplotype) represents a unique sequence pattern.

3.2. Overview of the sequences of early cases (and also other hosts and environments) and
their connection with the Huanan market
3.2.1. Released early SARS-CoV-2 genomes in China
The publicly available early SARS-CoV-2 genomes in China by week and by province are shown in
Table 5.
Table 5. Summary of early SARS-CoV-2 genomes in China (including sequences deposited in
GISAID).
Sample collection date (by year and by week)
2019
52
Anhui
Beijing
Chongqing
Fujian
Guangdong
Henan
Hong Kong
SAR
Hubei
2
Hunan
Jiangsu
Jiangxi
Shandong
Shanghai
Sichuan
Taiwan,
China
Yunnan
Zhejiang
Other*

2020
53

1

2 3

1

1
1
2 11

26

11

4 4
2
2
1
1

2
2
1

* province could not be specified

70

4
1
5
2
3
23
1

5

19

29

20
2
4
7
14
4
9

27
10
1
11
11
40
37

3

4

41
20

15
10

21

70

Fig. 5. Haplotype network of early sequences of SARS-CoV-2 from China, listed in Table 5. Two
viral genomes that carried a T>C variant at site 28 144 (compared to the reference genome)
connected the S/A and L/B major lineages, and these two genomes were sampled from Sichuan in
late January 2020. One viral genome that carried a C>T variant at site 8782 (compared to the
reference genome) connected the S/A and L/B major lineages, and this genome was sampled from
Hubei Province in late January.
The haplotype network analysis of the sequence data from China from December 2019 and
January 2020 (Fig. 5) reflects the same major lineages (L/B and S/A) as previous publications. This
analysis included 348 high-quality genomes. Sequence data from Hubei Province were distributed in
both lineages, as were sequences from other parts of China. A cluster of sequences from cases in
Zhejiang (black, Fig. 5) was identical to the larger lineage L/B cluster. According to information from
the national database and GISAID, this cluster was related to a meeting, with an index case from Wuhan.
When analysing the data by week of sampling, the earliest collected samples belonged mostly to lineage
L/B.
3.2.2. Released early SARS-CoV-2 genomes in Wuhan
There are 85 complete genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 collected prior to 31 January 2020, of which
81 sequences were from 66 COVID-19 cases, two sequences were from the Huanan market
environment and two with unknown sources. In total, all 13 early cases, S01-S13 with onset date before
31 December 2019, were identified (Table 6).
3.2.3. Assessment of quality of genomic data from early cases
In line with Chinese national policy, samples from initial patients were sent to more than one laboratory
to increase the likelihood of successful sequencing. As a consequence, the database contained genomes
from patients generated independently by different institutes (Table 6). The international team
performed an in-depth comparison of data from the same patient in order to understand potential effects
of platform and quality assessment procedure used by the different institutes on the final genomes.

71

There were in total 29 sequences for the 13 early cases submitted by different institutes. All of these
were generated by de novo sequencing and sequence assembly. The genetic variations of each
individual were identified by comparing with the reference sequence (NC_045512.2). Table 6
summarizes the data generated with different platforms and lists the key parameters that were used to
assess quality. Although the overall quality of the genomic sequences submitted by different institutes
was high, the team observed some inconsistency among different sequences from the same case. The
team therefore collected 26 sets of raw sequencing data for the 12 cases and re-analysed them with
uniform single nucleotide variants calling pipelines. The details of the calling procedures include:






removal of the adaptor sequences of the raw data and the low-quality bases from both 5ʹ and
3ʹ ends
alignment of the sequence reads to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome NC_045512.2 with
the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner-maximal exact matches (BWA-MEM) algorithm using the
default parameter settings
identification of single nucleotide variations with the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)
HaplotypeCaller (-ploidy 1 -ERC gVCF) and a Genomic Variant Call Format (gVCF) file was
generated for each raw data set
merging all gVCF files to generate a single file in Variant Call Format (VCF) format including
all called single nucleotide variants using the GATK Genotype GVCFs default parameters
filtering the original single nucleotide variant sets obtained above with the GATK
VariantFiltration (parameter setting: -filter-expression "MQ < 40.0"--filter-expression
"ReadPosRankSum <-8.0"--filter-expression "DP<10" --mask indel.filter.vcf.gz); all single
nucleotide variants with coverage below 10 were filtered out to obtain the final set of
variations.

There was still some inconsistency among the single nucleotide variants identified from different raw
data sets of the same individuals. The team adopted the criteria of high coverage > low coverage and
Illumina >Ion Torrent to determine the most likely reliable genome of each individual. The final set of
single nucleotide variants identified in the raw genomic sequencing data of the 13 cases is listed in
Table 7 and used in the haplotype network and other analyses. Consecutive samples were collected
from two patients (S05 and S09), which showed identical genomes. The number of mutations of these
13 early cases ranged from zero to three relative to the reference genome (NC_045512.2).

72

Table 6. Details of genomic sequencing of 13 early cases

Virus strain

Mutation
position from
submitted
genome
sequences

Mutation position
identified by reanalysis

Sequencing platform

Sequencing
depth

Indel
rate%16

ID

Onset

Collection
date

S01

2019/12/08

2020/01/01

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IP
BCAMS-WH05/2020

7866

7866(iSNV)a

Illumina NextSeq 500

459

0.01

S02

2019/12/13

2019/12/24

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IP
BCAMS-WH01/2019

3778, 8388,
8987

//b

Illumina NextSeq 500

2278

0.00

S03

2019/12/17

2019/12/26

WH01

6968, 11764

NA

DNBSEQ

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/W
H19008/2019

24325

24325

NGS

6720

0.01

2019/12/30

WIV02

21316, 24325

21316, 24325

Illumina MiSeq,
MGISEQ 2000

35

0.01

2019/12/30

SARS-CoV2/Wuhan_IMEWH02/human/2019/
CHN

//

//

Ion Torrent X5Plus

149

0.56

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/HB
CDC-HB-02/2019

24325

24325

Illumina MiSeq

475

0.01

S04

16

2019/12/19

Rate of insertion and deletion.

73

S05

2019/12/20

2019/12/30

hCoV19/Wuhan/IVDCHB-GX02/2019

24325

NA

Sanger dideoxy
sequencing

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IP
BCAMS-WH04/2019

//

376(iSNV)a

Illumina NextSeq 500

2491

0.01

2020/01/01

BetaCoV/Wuhan/W
H19004/2020

27493, 28253

//

NGS

2782

0.01

2020/01/01

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IV
DC-HB-04/2020

27493, 28253

NA

missing

S06

2019/12/20

2019/12/30

Wuhan-Hu-1

//

//

Illumina

530

0.005

S07

2019/12/20

2020/01/02

2019-nCoV WHU01

//

//

Illumina

530

0.01

2019/12/30

WIV07

8001, 9534

9534(Coverage<10
)

Illumina MiSeq,
MGISEQ 2000

11

0.02

2019/12/30

SARS-CoV2/Wuhan_IMEWH04/human/2019/
CHN

//

//

Ion Torrent X5Plus

45

0.51

2020/01/01

WH03

//

NA

DNBSEQ

2020/01/02

2019-nCoV WHU02

//

//

Illumina

140

0.01

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/HB
CDC-HB-03/2019

//

//

Illumina MiSeq

3156

0.01

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IP
BCAMS-WH02/2019

//

//

Illumina NextSeq 500

7885

0.01

S08

S09

S10

2019/12/20

2019/12/22

2019/12/23

74

S11

S12

S13

a
b

2019/12/23

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/W
H19001/2019

//

//

NGS

45

0.02

2019/12/30

WIV04

//

//

Illumina MiSeq,
Illumina HiSeq 1000

108

0.01

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IV
DC-HB-01/2019

//

NA

missing

2019/12/30

BetaCoV/Wuhan/IP
BCAMS-WH03/2019

6996

//

Illumina

3371

0.01

2019/12/30

WIV05

7016, 21137

//

MGISEQ 2000

13

0.01

2019/12/30

SARS-CoV2/Wuhan_IMEWH05/human/2019/
CHN

//

//

Ion Torrent X5Plus

37

0.50

2019/12/30

WIV06

//

//

Illumina MiSeq,
MGISEQ 2000

19

2019/12/30

SARS-CoV2/Wuhan_IMEWH03/human/2019/
CHN

24325

24325

Ion Torrent X5Plus

1407

0.55

2019/12/30

SARS-CoV2/Wuhan_IMEWH01/human/2019/
CHN

4946, 8782,
28144

4946, 8782, 28144

ThermoFisher S5Plus

176

0.53

2019/12/23

2019/12/26

Intra-host single nucleotide variant.
// indicates no mutation.

75

0.01

3.2.4 Linking with epidemiological data
In order to link the genomic data with the epidemiological data obtained from in-depth interviews of
patients, the team acquired the patient information from the submitter of the sequence, and crosschecked this in the epidemiological database (Fig. 6). Eleven early patients had connections with the
Huanan market, including seven vendors at the market, three purchasers and one visitor (Table 7, Fig.
6). The other two patients were visitors to other markets. Meanwhile, only one patient with onset date
of 17 December had domestic travel history. Concerning animal contact, eight of them had contacts
with dead animals and four of them had also mentioned contacts with poultry and aquatic products.
Moreover, four patients (S04, S05, S06 and S12) had contact with cold-chain goods with the earliest
onset date of 19 December 2019.
Among 11 sequences obtained from samples related to the Huanan market, eight had no mutations, two
had the same single mutation and one sequence showed two mutations. Sequences from the two patients
not linked with Huanan market had one and three mutations, respectively. Notably, all samples were
collected between 24 December 2019 and 2 January 2020, that is 4-24 days after the date of onset of
illness; therefore, the genomes obtained may not be necessarily representative of the initial virus at the
time of infection. Two sequences were from isolates obtained from environmental samples collected
from Huanan market on 1 January 2020; these had zero and two mutations, respectively. As they were
collected from either the floor or a wall in the market, the virus is likely to reflect contamination from
cases.

Table 7. The overview of sequences from early patients (with onset date before 31 December 2019)

Sequence ID

Relation to
the Huanan
market

S01

EPI_ISL_40
3928

Visitor to
another
market

S02

EPI_ISL_40
2123

Vendor

Sample
ID

S03

S04

Stall

Seafood

Onset
date

Collection
date

Mutations
(gene
name)a

Lineage

8 Dec

1 Jan 2020

7866
(ORF1a)

L/B

13 Dec

24 Dec

0

L/B

6968
(ORF1a),

EPI_ISL_40
6798

Purchaser

NMDC6001
3002-06

Vendor

EPI_ISL_40
3929

17 Dec

26 Dec

L/B
11764
(ORF1a)

Frozen
goods

19 Dec

30 Dec

24325 (S) b

L/B

Purchaser

20 Dec

30 Dec

0

L/B

NMDC6001
3002-09

Purchaser

20 Dec

1 Jan

0b

L/B

MN908947 c

Purchaser

20 Dec

30 Dec

0

L/B

S05

S06

76

S07

MN988668

Vendor

Seafood

20 Dec

2 Jan

0

L/B

S08

EPI_ISL_52
9216

Vendor

Seafood

20 Dec

30 Dec

0b

L/B

MN988669

Visitor

22 Dec

1 Jan

0

L/B

EPI_ISL_40
6800

Visitor

22 Dec

2 Jan

0

L/B

S10

GWHABKG
00000001

Vendor

Vegetab
le

23 Dec

30 Dec

0d

L/B

S11

GWHABKH
00000001

Vendor

Seafood

23 Dec

30 Dec

0b

L/B

S12

GWHACAU
01000001

Vendor

Dry
cargo

23 Dec

30 Dec

24325 (S) b

L/B

30 Dec

4946
(ORF1a),
8782
(ORF1a),
28144
(ORF8)

S/A

S09

S13

EPI_ISL_52
9213

Visitor to
another
market

E1

EPI_ISL_40
8514

Environment

1 Jan

12350
(ORF1a),
29019 (N)

L/B

E2

EPI_ISL_40
8515

Environment

1 Jan

0

L/B

26 Dec

a

Note that the mutations may arise within a patient within the course of infection. See also Table 6.
Samples had been sequenced multiple times but showed discrepant results, the sequence supported by more
submissions or with highest sequence depth being chosen.
c
NCBI reference genome.
d
Samples had been sequenced multiple times and showed consistent results.
The sample ID of patients with contact history with dead animals is italicized.
The sample ID of patients with contact history with poultry and aquatic products is in bold face.
b

77

Fig. 6. 174 COVID-19 pneumonia cases classified by genome sequence availability and market
exposure. Top: the time series; bottom: the spatial distribution - note: “Huanan market” and
“Other market” in the legend refer to market exposure for the 13 early cases sequenced.

3.2.5 Haplotype analysis of early cases
A haplotype network analysis was performed using the 66 high-quality and non-redundant sequences
from December and January (Fig. 7). Note that the timing indicated in the analysis was done by
sampling date, as onset times were only available for the 13 cases with illness onset in December. The
numbers indicated refer to cases with illness onset in December (Tables 6 and 7). The analysis shows
that several of the cases with exposure to the Huanan market had identical virus genomes, suggesting
that they were part of a cluster. However, the sequence data also showed that some diversity of viruses
was already present in the early phase of the pandemic in Wuhan, suggesting unsampled chains of
transmission beyond the Huanan market cluster. There was no obvious clustering by the
78

epidemiological parameters of exposure to animals or aquatic products (Table 7, Fig. 7). Four
sequenced cases with cold-chain exposure (in one case cold seafood but unknown in the other three)
showed two different genomes; that is, two cases had identical virus strains without mutation and the
other two had identical sequences with one mutation. However, another six cases without seafood
exposure history also had identical sequences. The current analysis does not provide definitive support
for specific exposures explaining the pattern of sequence diversity.

Fig. 7. Haplotype network of early sequences of Wuhan. One viral genome that carried a C>T
variant at site 8782 (compared to the reference genome) connected the S/A and L/B major
lineages, and this genome was sampled from Wuhan in late January 2020.

3.2.6. Analysis of the time to most recent common ancestor
Different approaches have been used to analyse the SARS-CoV-2 genomes accumulated at different
time points as the pandemic developed (Table 8), and the results suggest that the time to most recent
common ancestor (tMRCA) inferred by more than 10 groups using different approaches is similar:
between mid-November and mid-December 2019.(19, 31-42)
The tMRCA and mutation rate were estimated with the genomic sequences of 66 early cases (from
Wuhan, before 31 January 2020). The inferred date of the tMRCA was 11 December 2019, with the
95% confidence interval ranging from 13 November 2019 to 23 December 2019, and the mutation rate
was estimated to be 6.54 × 10-4 per site per year, with the confidence interval (3.32 × 10-4 – 9.54 × 104
) (Table 9). The team also inferred the tMRCA with fixed mutation rate values (from previous studies),
listed in Table 9. Overall, all these values are consistent with existing results, indicating a recent
common ancestor of these viral genomic sequences.

79

Table 8. Time to the most common ancestor (tMRCA) inferred in different studies.
Reference

Sample
size

Country

Inferred tMRCA17

Method

2019, late September
Bai et al. (31)

622

（95% CI

China

Strict clock model
(BEAST v2.6.2)

2019.8.28 - 2019.10.26）

Li et al. (41)

Li et al. (41)

32

32

2019.10.15

Rate-informed strict

(95% CI

clock model

2019.5.2 - 2020.1.17)

(BEAST v1.8.4)

2019.12.6
(95%BCI

Rate-estimated relaxed clock
model

2019.11.16 -2019.12.21)

(BEAST v1.8.4)

China

China

2019.11.25
Relaxed clock model
Giovanetti et al. (34)

54

Italy

(95%CI
(BEAST v1.10.4)
2019.9.28 - 201912.21)
2019.12.3
Unreported clock model

Hill & Rambaut (36)

116

UK

(95%CI
(BEAST v1.7.0)
2019.11.16 - 2019.12.17)
2019.12.1

Lu et al. (40)

53

Strict clock model

China,
UK

(95%HPD
(BEAST v1.10.4)
2019.11.15 - 2019.12.13)
2019.11.19
Strict clock model

Duchene et al. (33)

47

Australia

(95%HPD
(BEAST v1.10)
2019.10.21 - 2019.12.11)
2019.11.12
Relaxed clock model

Duchene et al. (33)

47

Australia

(95%HPD
(BEAST v1.10)
2019.9.26 - 2019.12.11)
2019.12.8
Strict clock model

Volz et al. (42)

53

UK

(95%CI
(BEAST v2.6.0)
2019.11.21 - 2019.12.20)
2019.12.5

Volz et al. (42)

53

UK
(95%CI

17

Maximum Likelihood
regression

Note that the 95% confidence intervals cited include highest posterior density, Bayesian credible intervals and
frequentist confidence intervals; see individual publications for details.

80

Lai et al. (37)

Nie et al. (39)

Chaw et al. (32)

52

124

137

2019.11.6 - 2019.12.13)

(treedater R package v0.5.0)

2019.11.18
(95%CI

A Bayesian framework using
a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method

2019.9.28 - 2019.12.13)

（BEAST v.1.8.4）

2019.11.12
(95%CI

A Bayesian framework using
a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method

2019.10.11 - 2019.12.9)

（BEAST v.1.8.4）

2019.12.11

A Bayesian framework using
a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) method（BEAST
v1.10.4）

Italy

China

Taiwan,
China

(95%CI
2019.11.13 - 2019.12.23)
2019.11.7

Gómez-Carballa et al.
(35)

Strict clock model
4721

Spain

(95%CI
(BEAST v2.6.2)
2019.8.18 - 2019.12.2)
2019.11.12

Gómez-Carballa et al.
(35)

Relaxed clock model
4721

Spain

(95%CI
(BEAST v2.6.2)
2019.8.7 - 2019.12.8)
2019.11.28
Maximum likelihood method

Liu et al. (19)

12 909

China

(95%CI
2019.10.20 - 2019.12.9)

Table 9. The inference of tMRCA using the genomic sequences of the 66 early cases with
different mutation rates.
Mutation rate (per site per year)

Date of the MRCA

6.54×10-4 (3.32×10-4 – 9.54×10-4) a

11 December 2019 (13 November 2019 – 23 December 2019)

8.69×10-4 (8.61×10-4 – 8.77×10-4) b

19 December 2019 (14 December 2019 – 23 December 2019)

5.42×10-4 (4.29×10-4 – 8.02×10-4) c

5 December 2019 (16 November 2019 – 21 December 2019)

6.05×10-4 (4.46×10-4 – 8.22×10-4) d

9 December 2019 (16 November 2019 – 22 December 2019)

a

: estimating both mutation rate and tMRCA by virusMuT.(19)
: using mutation rate of reference.(19)
c
: using mutation rate of reference,(35) uncorrelated relaxed-clock method.
d
: using mutation rate of reference,(35) strict-clock model.
b

In summary, the tMRCA analysis based on molecular sequence data suggested that the pandemic onset
occurred before the end of December 2019. The tMRCA analyses can be considered a statistical
inference but do not provide definitive proof of time of origins. The point estimates for the time to most
81

recent ancestor ranged from late September to early December, but most estimates were between midNovember and early December.

3.3. Evidence for the early occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 from other studies
It remains to be determined where SARS-CoV-2 originated. Although the virus was first identified as
the cause of a cluster of cases of severe pneumonia in Wuhan, to date it is uncertain from where the
first cases originated. A few studies suggest that cases may have occurred before December 2019, the
time when circulation of SARS-CoV-2 was thought to have started in Hubei Province. In a retrospective
survey, sewage samples collected on 12 March 2019 in Barcelona, Spain, were positive for SARS-CoV2 RNA, but other samples collected between January 2018 and December 2019 were all negative. The
PCR signals has not been confirmed by sequencing and could be false-positive signals.(43)
In Italy, the first known COVID-19 case was reported in the town of Codogno in the Lombardy region
on 21 February 2020. Since then, a few studies have suggested evidence for earlier circulation. La Rosa
and others (44) found the first positive sewage sample in northern Italy mid-December 2019, using a
sewage testing protocol with nested PCR. In the same region, SARS-CoV-2 was detected by PCR in a
throat swab from a child with suspected measles early in December.(45) Gianotti et al. (46) reported
reactivity by in situ hybridization with a range of probes for SARS-CoV-2 in skin biopsies from a 25year-old woman sampled in November 2019. She tested negative by PCR but in June 2020 was
serologically positive. A serological survey among participants in a lung cancer screening programme
described finding a few persons with neutralizing antibodies as early as October 2019.(46a)
In France, an oropharyngeal sample from a haemoptysis patient who was admitted to hospital on
27 December 2019 was identified positive by RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 RNA.(47) A separate,
serological study found evidence for a significant increase in prevalence of neutralizing antibodies in
mid-December, suggesting considerable earlier circulation of the virus.(47a) In Brazil, testing of
sewage by RT-PCR yielded SARS-CoV-2-positive results in samples collected on 27 November 2019,
much earlier than the first reported case in the Americas.(48, 49)
In the United States of America, a serological survey of 7389 archived donated blood samples collected
between 13 December 2019 and 17 January 2020 from nine states identified 106 positive samples,
suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 might have been introduced into United States of America before the first
identified case in the country.(50)
Collectively, these studies from different countries suggest that SARS-CoV-2 circulation preceded the
initial detection of cases by several weeks. Some of the suspected positive samples were detected even
earlier than the first case in Wuhan, suggesting that circulation of the virus in other regions had been
missed. So far, however, the study findings were not confirmed, methods used were not standardized,
and serological assays may suffer from non-specific signals. Nonetheless, it is important to investigate
these potential early events.
4. Zoonotic origins of SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have had a zoonotic origin.(51) Genome analysis reveals that bats may be
the source of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig.8).(13, 41, 52, 53) However, the specific route of transmission from
natural reservoirs to humans remains unclear. Initial analysis revealed that the SARS-CoV-2 genome
(WH-Human 1) was closely related to SARS-like coronaviruses previously found in bats,(10) and the
whole-genome sequence identity of the novel virus has 96.2% similarity to a bat SARS-related
coronavirus (SARSr-CoV; RaTG13).(13) In contrast, the SARS-CoV-2 genome is less similar to the
genomes of SARS-CoV (about 79%) or MERS-CoV (about 50%).(12, 53, 54) Notably, a novel batderived coronavirus, denoted RmYN02, shares 93.3% nucleotide identity with SARS-CoV-2 at the
genomic scale.(11)
82

In addition, SARS-CoV-2 has a unique insertion of four amino acids between the S1 and S2 domains
of the spike (S) protein, which creates a cleavage site for the furin enzyme. This furin-cleavage site is
not present in most other betacoronaviruses (for instance, SARS-CoV), and it may increase the
efficiency of virus infection of cells.(38) As with SARS-CoV-2, RmYN02 was also characterized by
the insertion of multiple amino acids at the junction site of the S1 and S2 subunits of the spike protein,
providing evidence that such insertion events occur naturally in animals.
Besides RaTG13 and RmYN02, very recently SARS-CoV-2-related coronaviruses were isolated from
two Rhinolophus shameli bats (RshSTT200 and RshSTT182). These animals were sampled in
Cambodia in 2010, and samples were processed for sequencing recently.(55) The whole genome
comparisons indicated that these viruses overall shared the nucleotide identity of 92.6% with SARSCoV-2. The results suggest that the geographical distribution of SARS-CoV-2 related viruses is much
wider than previously expected.(55) Another study found related viruses in Thailand, in Rhinolophus
acuminatus bats, where near identical viruses were found in five animals from a single colony,
suggesting a colony-specific sequence signature.(55a) The above-mentioned bat viruses differ in their
ability to bind to the human ACE2 receptor from RmYN02, but both RmYN02 and RshSTT200/182
share part of the furin-cleavage site unique to SARS-CoV-2. There is evidence of recombination in the
evolutionary history of these Thailand bat coronaviruses. These findings do show that the ongoing
search for the origins of SARS-CoV-2 should consider wider geographical ranges, multiple potentially
susceptible species, and a sampling design that includes knowledge on number and densities of colonies.
Current studies have demonstrated that Malayan pangolins (Manis javanica) hosted two sub-lineages
of SARS-CoV-2-related coronaviruses (see Fig.8). In the first study, animals (including four Chinese
pangolins (M. pentadactyla) and 25 Malayan pangolins (M. javanica)) had been obtained during antismuggling operations by the Guangdong customs in March and August 2019.(56) The viruses from the
animals (termed pangolin-CoV-GDC) shared a genomic similarity of 90.1% to SARS-CoV-2. The
pangolin-CoV-GDC has 100%, 98.6%, 97.8% and 90.7% amino acid identity with SARS-CoV-2 in the
E, M, N and S proteins, respectively.(56) Both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 bind to angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors through the receptor-binding domain of the S protein to enter
human cells.(13, 54, 57-61) Five of the six critical amino acid residues in the receptor-binding domain
differ between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV, and structural analysis revealed that the spike of SARSCoV-2 has a higher binding affinity to ACE2 than SARS-CoV.(61) Although SARS-CoV-2 is closely
related to RaTG13, only one out of the six critical amino acid sites is identical between the two viruses.
However, these six critical amino acid sites are identical between SARS-CoV-2 and pangolin-CoVGDC.(56, 62, 63) Although some researchers thought these observations served as evidence that SARSCoV-2 may have originated in the recombination of a virus similar to pangolin-CoV with one similar
to RaTG13,(56, 63) others argued that the identical functional sites in SARS-CoV-2 and pangolin-CoVGDC may actually result from coincidental convergent evolution.(24, 62) Interestingly, upon farm-tofarm passage of SARS-CoV-2 in mink in the Netherlands, a mutation was observed in a receptorbinding residue that is common to bat and pangolin and rarely found in the human SARS-CoV-2
database, suggesting adaptation (Oude Munnink et al, unpublished).
The second sublineage of pangolin-CoV (termed pangolin-CoV-GXC) was isolated from 18 Malayan
pangolins obtained during anti-smuggling operations performed by Guangxi customs officers between
August 2017 and January 2018.(62) This study obtained six complete or near complete genome
sequences, which were highly similarly to each other (>99%) and had a sequence similarity of 85% to
SARS-CoV-2 at the genomic scale.(62) A small-scale serological survey found neutralising antibodies
to a bat SARSr-CoV in pangolins seized in Thailand.(55a) Based on recombination analysis of currently
known SARSr-CoV viruses, pangolins have been proposed as the original reservoir, but the inclusion
of mosaic sections of the genome complicates the use of phylogenetic analyses.(55b) When removing
recombinant sections of the genomes, Boni et al. (3) concluded that the binding to the human ACE2
83

receptor is a trait shared with bat viruses, and that the lineage giving rise to SARS-CoV-2 has been
circulating unnoticed in bats for decades
Although inconclusive, these studies (3, 64), collectively demonstrate that pangolins should be included
in the search for possible natural hosts or intermediate hosts of the novel coronaviruses.
Comparative genomic analyses have revealed that extensive recombination events occurred during the
divergence between SARS-CoV-2 and other SARS-CoV-2-related coronaviruses.(12, 37, 51, 65)
Although the overall genomes differ by about 3.8% (nucleotides) between SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13,
the divergence at neutral sites (dS, number of synonymous changes in the synonymous sites of the
protein-coding regions) was 17% between these two viruses. In contrast, the proportion on nonsynonymous changes (dN, number of non-synonymous changes in the non-synonymous sites of the
protein-coding regions) was only 0.8%, reflecting strong negative selection pressure. Calculating
sequence differences without separating these two classes of sites may underestimate the extent of
molecular divergence by several fold. Overall, these results suggest that, during the divergence between
SARS-CoV-2 and RaTG13, more than 95% of the amino-acid-changing mutations have been removed
by purifying selection.(24)

SARS-CoV-2
Bat RaTG13
Bat RmYN02
Bat RshSTT200
Bat RshSTT182
Pangolin-CoV GD customs
Pangolin-CoV GX customs
Bat SARSr-CoV ZXC21
Bat SARSr-CoV ZC45
SARS-CoV
Bat SARSr-CoV BM48-31
0.07 Sub/Site

Fig. 8. The phylogenetic tree of SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses in bats and pangolins
(based on the concatenated protein sequences of all the genes).

An initial search for bat betacoronaviruses provided 1501 results 18 and for sarbecovirus sequences from
all non-human hosts through GenBank19 467 results. These include some SARS-CoV-2 sequences
related to the current pandemic (for example, nine from tigers) or sequences from animal infection
experiments (for example, murine 62). Most were bat viruses (310) but again this number included
repeats of viruses or gene fragments. Seventy-one reliable genomes were obtained from 13 species,
comprising 11 bat species, humans (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) and Malayan pangolins (Manis
javanica); these are presented in Table 10. The genomes include bat sarbecoviruses from Japan (66)
and Cambodia (55). The vast majority of data was collected in China, reflecting more comprehensive
18

Database of bat-associated viruses, available at http://www.mgc.ac.cn/cgi-bin/DBatVir/main.cgi (accessed 25
March 2021)
19
National Center for Biotechnology Information available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nucleotide/
(accessed 25 March 2021).

84

research efforts in China compared to other parts of the world. Also, metadata associated with globally
shared genome data typically are incomplete. For instance, the location of sequences reflects where
samples were taken, but not the geographical origin of the species sampled. For instance, pangolin virus
genomes were listed as having been sampled in Guangdong and Guanxi provinces, whereas they were
from imported animals. Further work is needed to develop integrated genomic and epidemiological data
collections on animals to support the origin-tracing studies.
5. Genomic sequencing data of SARS-CoV-2 viruses in naturally infected animals
Since the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in humans, the virus has been detected in domestic and farmed
animals exposed to infected humans. The first evidence of this was from reported cases of SARS-CoV2 infection in dogs in Hong Kong SAR and cats in Belgium and Hong Kong SAR, respectively.
Subsequently, infection was diagnosed in a Siberian tiger in a zoo in the Bronx (New York, United
States of America). In all cases, infection was diagnosed by detection of viral RNA in respiratory
samples, and in some animals further supported by detection of specific antibodies.(67) Experimental
infections have confirmed species’ susceptibility, with cats and ferrets considered to be highly
infectious as evidenced by transmission experiments.(5, 9) In line with the susceptibility of ferrets,
natural infections have been observed in farmed mink, animals also belonging to the family of
mustelids.(6, 7) By now, mink farm infections have been reported from Canada, Denmark, France,
Greece, Lithuania, The Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden and the USA. Animals may display
symptoms of respiratory disease and increased mortality, but not all farms are equally affected and
circulation of the virus may go unnoticed.(7, 68) Sequencing has shown that SARS-CoV-2 may evolve
during circulation on mink farms, with selection of variants with mutations in the contact residues of
the ACE2 receptor-binding domain of the spike protein.(6, 69) The governments of Denmark and The
Netherlands have ordered the culling of all mink in order to reduce the potential for adaptation to
circulation in high density mink farms. The high susceptibility and transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 in
mink was confirmed by experimental infections (70).

Table 10. Sarbecovirus genomes (Extracted from 55, 66 Boni et al, 2020)
Virus name

Species

Sample location

RshSTT182

R_shameli

Steung
Cambodia

RshSTT200

R_shameli

Steung
Cambodia

Rc-o319

R_cornutus

RpShaanxi2011

Year

Month

Day

Treng, EPI_ISL_852604

2010

12

NA

Treng, EPI_ISL_852605

2010

12

NA

Iwate, Japan

LC556375

2013

R_pusillus

Shaanxi

JX993987

2011

9

NA

HuB2013

R_sinicus

Hubei

KJ473814

2013

4

NA

279_2005

R_macrotis

Hubei

DQ648857

2004

11

NA

Rm1

R_macrotis

Hubei

DQ412043

2004

11

NA

JL2012

R_ferrumequinum

Jilin

KJ473811

2012

10

NA

JTMC15

R_ferrumequinum

Jilin

KU182964

2013

10

NA

HeB2013

R_ferrumequinum

Hebei

KJ473812

2013

4

NA

SX2013

R_ferrumequinum

Shanxi

KJ473813

2013

11

NA

85

Accession no.

Jiyuan-84

R_ferrumequinum

Henan-Jiyuan

KY770860

2012

NA

NA

Rf1

R_ferrumequinum

Hubei-Yichang

DQ412042

2004

11

NA

GX2013

R_sinicus

Guangxi

KJ473815

2012

11

NA

Rp3

R_pearsoni

Guangxi-Nanning DQ071615

2004

12

NA

Rf4092

R_ferrumequinum

Yunnan-Kunming KY417145

2012

9

18

Rs4231

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417146

2013

4

17

WIV16

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KT444582

2013

7

21

Rs4874

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417150

2013

7

21

YN2018B

R_affinis

Yunnan

MK211376

2016

9

NA

Rs7327

R_sinicus

Yunnan--Kunming KY417151

2014

10

24

Rs9401

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417152

2015

10

16

Rs4084

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417144

2012

9

18

RsSHC014

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KC881005

2011

4

17

Rs3367

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KC881006

2012

3

19

WIV1

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KF367457

2012

9

NA

YN2018C

R_affinis

Yunnan-Kunming MK211377

2016

9

NA

As6526

Aselliscus_stoliczkanus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417142

2014

5

12

YN2018D

R_affinis

Yunnan

MK211378

2016

9

NA

Rs4081

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417143

2012

9

18

Rs4255

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417149

2013

4

17

Rs4237

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417147

2013

4

17

Rs4247

R_sinicus

Yunnan-Kunming KY417148

2013

4

17

Rs672

R_sinicus

Guizhou

FJ588686

2006

9

NA

YN2018A

R_affinis

Yunnan

MK211375

2016

9

NA

YN2013

R_sinicus

Yunnan

KJ473816

2010

12

NA

Anlong-103

R_sinicus

Guizhou-Anlong

KY770858

2013

NA

NA

Anlong-112

R_sinicus

Guizhou-Anlong

KY770859

2013

NA

NA

(SARS COV 1)

Homo sapiens

Guangzhou

AY394995

2002

NA

NA

YNLF_31C

R_Ferrumequinum

Yunnan-Lufeng

KP886808

2013

5

23

YNLF_34C

R_Ferrumequinum

Yunnan-Lufeng

KP886809

2013

5

23

F46

R_pusillus

Yunnan

KU973692

2012

NA

NA

SC2018

R_spp

Sichuan

MK211374

2016

10

NA

LYRa11

R_affinis

Yunnan-Baoshan

KF569996

2011

NA

NA

HSZ-Cc

86

Yunnan2011

Chaerephon_plicata

Yunnan

JX993988

2011

11

NA

Longquan_140

R_monoceros

China

KF294457

2012

NA

NA

HKU3-1

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

DQ022305

2005

2

17

HKU3-3

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

DQ084200

2005

3

17

HKU3-2

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

DQ084199

2005

2

24

HKU3-4

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153539

2005

7

20

HKU3-5

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153540

2005

9

20

HKU3-6

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153541

2005

12

16

HKU3-10

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153545

2006

10

28

HKU3-9

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153544

2006

10

28

HKU3-11

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153546

2007

3

7

HKU3-13

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153548

2007

11

15

HKU3-12

R_sinicus

Hong_Kong SAR

GQ153547

2007

5

15

HKU3-7

R_sinicus

Guangdong

GQ153542

2006

2

15

HKU3-8

R_sinicus

Guangdong

GQ153543

2006

2

15

CoVZC45

R_sinicus

Zhoushan-Dinghai MG772933

2017

2

NA

CoVZXC21

R_sinicus

Zhoushan-Dinghai MG772934

2015

7

NA

Wuhan-Hu-1
(SARS-CoV-2)

Homo sapiens

Wuhan

MN908947

2019

12

NA

BtKY72

R_spp

Kenya

KY352407

2007

10

NA

BM48-31

R_blasii

Bulgaria

NC_014470

2008

4

NA

RaTG13

R_affinis

Yunnan

EPI_ISL_402131

2013

7

24

P4L

pangolin

Guangxi

EPI_ISL_410538

2017

NA

NA

P5L

pangolin

Guangxi

EPI_ISL_410540

2017

NA

NA

P5E

pangolin

Guangxi

EPI_ISL_410541

2017

NA

NA

P1E

pangolin

Guangxi

EPI_ISL_410539

2017

NA

NA

P2V

pangolin

Guangxi

EPI_ISL_410542

2017

NA

NA

Pangolin-CoV

pangolin

Guangdong

EPI_ISL_410721

2019

R_ is Rhinolophus bat genus. Pangolin is Manis javanica.

6. Summaries and perspectives
6.1. Summaries
87

NA

The joint international team concluded that:
1. Linking genomic data with epidemiological data is essential for molecular analysis in support
of origin-tracing studies.
2. Quality control of genome sequencing is important to provide reliable results.
3. Viruses from some Huanan market cases were identical, suggesting a spreading event.
4. Analysis of early case genomes also showed some diversity, suggesting additional sources and
unrecognized circulation.
5. Estimates of the time to most recent common ancestor (from literature and re-analysis) suggest
that virus transmission or circulation date might be recent, in late 2019.
6. Up to now, the most closely related genomic sequences have been found in bats.
7. Reports of detection of SARS-CoV-2 in cases and environmental samples before January 2020
in different parts of the world require follow-up.
6.2. Recommendations
The joint international team made the following recommendations:
1. Conduct further retrospective and systematic research around earlier cases and possible hosts
for SARS-CoV-2 around the world.
2. In view of the team’s re-analysis of the data quality of early cases in Wuhan, China, early cases
or samples collected in future SARS-CoV-2-global tracing studies need to be sequenced using
multi-platforms and high-depth sequencing (more than 40-fold coverage) in order to obtain
reliable high-quality data.
3. Continue to develop an integrated database that includes global SARS-CoV-2 genome and raw
sequences with epidemiological and clinical data, and linked analysis results.
4. Develop a comprehensive information database to combine molecular data, global distribution
data and other metadata of potential animal hosts.

References
1. Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin WI, Holmes EC, Garry RF. (2020). The proximal origin of SARSCoV-2. Nat Med 26, 450-452.
2. Lloyd-Smith JO, George D, Pepin KM, Pitzer VE, Pulliam JR, Dobson AP et al. (2009). Epidemic
dynamics at the human-animal interface. Science 326, 1362-1367.
3. Boni MF, Lemey P, Jiang X, Lam TTY, Perry BW, Castoe TA, Rambaut A, Robertson DL. (2020).
Evolutionary origins of the SARS-CoV-2 sarbecovirus lineage responsible for the COVID-19
pandemic. Nature Microbiology, 5(11), pp.1408-1417.
4. Shi J, Wen Z, Zhong G, Yang H, Wang C, Huang B et al. (2020). Susceptibility of ferrets, cats, dogs,
and other domesticated animals to SARS-coronavirus 2. Science 368, 1016-1020.
5. Richard M, Kok A, de Meulder D, Bestebroer TM Lamers MM, Okba NMA et al. (2020). SARSCoV-2 is transmitted via contact and via the air between ferrets. Nat Commun 11, 3496.
6. Oude Munnink BB, Sikkema RS, Nieuwenhuijse DF, Molenaar RJ, Munger E, Molenkamp R et al.
(2021). Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 on mink farms between humans and mink and back to humans.
Science 371, 172-177.
7. Boklund A, Hammer AS, Quaade M., Rasmussen TB, Lohse L, Strandbygaard B Jorgensen CS et al.
(2021). SARS-CoV-2 in Danish Mink Farms: Course of the Epidemic and a Descriptive Analysis of the
Outbreaks in 2020. Animals (Basel) 11.
8. Grubaugh ND, Ladner JT, Lemey P, Pybus OG, Rambaut A, Holmes EC et al. (2019). Tracking virus
outbreaks in the twenty-first century. Nat Microbiol 4, 10-19.
9. Shi W, Li J, Zhou H, Gao GF (2017). Pathogen genomic surveillance elucidates the origins,
transmission and evolution of emerging viral agents in China. Sci China Life Sci 60, 1317-1330.
88

10. Wu F, Zhao S, Yu, B, Chen, YM, Wang W, Song ZG et al. (2020). A new coronavirus associated
with human respiratory disease in China. Nature 579, 265-269.
11. Zhou H, Chen X, Hu T, Li J, Song H, Liu Y, et al. (2020). A Novel Bat Coronavirus Closely Related
to SARS-CoV-2 Contains Natural Insertions at the S1/S2 Cleavage Site of the Spike Protein. Curr Biol
30, 2196-2203 e2193.
12. Wu A, Peng Y, Huang B, Ding X, Wang X, Niu HP et al. (2020) Genomce compositionand
divergence of the novel coronavirus (2-019-nCoV originating inCHina. Cell Host Microbe 27:325-328
13. Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. (2020). A pneumonia outbreak
associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270-273.
14. Oude Munnink BB, Nieuwenhuijse DF, Stein M, O'Toole A, Haverkate M, Mollers M, et al. (2020).
Rapid SARS-CoV-2 whole-genome sequencing and analysis for informed public health decisionmaking in the Netherlands. Nat Med 26, 1405-1410.
15. Du P, Ding N, Li J, Zhang F, Wang Q, Chen Z, et al. (2020). Genomic surveillance of COVID-19
cases in Beijing. Nat Commun 11, 5503.
16. Gudbjartsson DF, Helgason A, Jonsson H, Magnusson OT, Melsted P, Norddahl GL, et al. (2020).
Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic Population. N Engl J Med 382, 2302-2315.
17. Wang X, Zhou Q, He Y, Liu L, Ma X, Wei X, et al. (2020). Nosocomial outbreak of COVID-19
pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Eur Respir J 55.
18. Martin MA, VanInsberghe D, Koelle K. (2021). Insights from SARS-CoV-2 sequences. Science
371, 466-467.
19. Liu Q, Zhao S, Shi CM, Song S, Zhu S, Su Y, et al. (2020). Population Genetics of SARS-CoV-2:
Disentangling Effects of Sampling Bias and Infection Clusters. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics.
20. Rambaut A, Holmes EC, O'Toole A, Hill V, McCrone JT, Ruis C, et al. (2020). A dynamic
nomenclature proposal for SARS-CoV-2 lineages to assist genomic epidemiology. Nat Microbiol 5,
1403-1407.
20a. Alm E, Broberg EK, Connor T, Hodcroft EB, Komissarov AB, Maurer-Stroh S et al. The WHO
European Region sequencing laboratories and GISAID EpiCoV group. Geographical and temporal
distribution of SARS-CoV-2 clades in the WHO European Region, January to June 2020. Euro Surveill.
2020;25(32):pii=2001410. https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.32.2001410
21. Zhao WM, Song SH, Chen ML, Zou D, Ma LN, Ma YK et al. (2020). The 2019 novel coronavirus
resource. Yi Chuan 42, 212-221.
21a. Song S, Ma L, Zou D et al. The Global Landscape of SARS-CoV-2 Genomes, Variants, and
Haplotypes
in
2019nCoVR.
Genomics
Proteomics
Bioinformatics.
2020. doi:
10.1016/j.gpb.2020.09.001
22. Wu L, Sun Q, Desmeth P, Sugawara H, Xu Z, McCluskey K, et al. (2017). World data centre for
microorganisms: an information infrastructure to explore and utilize preserved microbial strains
worldwide. Nucleic Acids Res 45, D611-D618.
23. Wang BL, Zhou, Q, He Y (2019). National Gene Bank：Together, Share. Yi Chuan 41, 761-772.
24. Tang XL, Wu CC, Li X, Song YH, Yao XM, Wu XK, et al. (2020). On the origin and continuing
evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Natl Sci Rev 7, 1012-1023.
24a. Wu A, Niu P, Wang L, Zhou H, Zhao X, Wang W, et al. (2020b). Mutations, Recombination and
Insertion in the Evolution of 2019-nCoV. bioRxiv. doi: 10.1101/2020.02.29.971101.
25. Hadfield J, Megill C, Bell SM, Huddleston J, Potter B Callender, C, et al. (2018). Nextstrain: realtime tracking of pathogen evolution. Bioinformatics 34, 4121-4123.
26. Matsuda T, Suzuki H, Ogata N. (2002). Phylogenetic analyses of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 reflected the several routes of introduction to Taiwan, the United States, and
Japan. arXiv 08802.
27. Yao H, Lu X, Chen Q, Xu K, Chen Y, Cheng M, et al. (2020). Patient-derived SARS-CoV-2
mutations impact viral replication dynamics and infectivity in vitro and with clinical implications in
vivo. Cell Discov 6, 76.
28. Zhang L, Yang JR, Zhang Z, Lin Z. (2020). Genomic variations of SARS-CoV-2 suggest multiple
outbreak
sources
of
transmission.
medRxiv.
doi:10.1101/2020.02.25.20027953:
2020.2002.2025.20027953.
29. Zhang X, Tan Y, Ling Y, Lu G, Liu F, Yi Z, et al. (2020). Viral and host factors related to the clinical
89

outcome of COVID-19. Nature 583, 437-440.
30. Foster P, Forster L, Renfrew C, Forster M. (2020). Phylogenetic network analysis of SARS-CoV-2
genomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(17), pp.9241-9243.
31. Bai Y, Jiang D, Lon JR, Chen X, Hu M, Lin S, et al. (2020). Comprehensive evolution and molecular
characteristics of a large number of SARS-CoV-2 genomes reveal its epidemic trends. Int J Infect Dis
100, 164-173.
32. Chaw SM, Tai JH, Chen SL, Hsieh CH, Chang SY, Yeh SH, et al. (2020). The origin and underlying
driving forces of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak. J Biomed Sci 27, 73.
33. Duchene S, Featherstone L, Haritopoulou-Sinanidou M, Rambaut A, Lemey P, Baele, G. (2020).
Temporal signal and the phylodynamic threshold of SARS-CoV-2. Virus Evol 6, veaa061.
34. Gianotti R, Barberis M, Fellegara G, Galvan-Casas C, Gianotti, E. (2021). COVID-19 related
dermatosis in November 2019. Could this case be Italy's patient zero? Br J Dermatol.
35. Gómez-Carballa A, Bello X, Pardo-Seco J Martinon-Torres, F, Salas, A. (2020). Mapping genome
variation of SARS-CoV-2 worldwide highlights the impact of COVID-19 super-spreaders. Genome Res
30, 1434-1448.
36. Hill V, Rambaut A (2020). Phylodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 | Update 2020-03-06.
virologicalorg Vol 2021.
37. Lai A, Bergna A, Acciarri C, Galli M, Zehender G. (2020). Early phylogenetic estimate of the
effective reproduction number of SARS-CoV-2. J Med Virol 92, 675-679.
37. Li X, Song Y, Wong G, Cui J. (2020c). Bat origin of a new human coronavirus: there and back again.
Sci China Life Sci 63, 461-462.
38. Li X, Giorgi EE, Marichannegowda MH, Foley B, Xiao C, Kong XP, et al. (2020b). Emergence of
SARS-CoV-2 through recombination and strong purifying selection. Sci Adv 6.
39. Nie Q, Li X, Chen W, Liu D, Chen Y, Li H, et al. (2020). Phylogenetic and phylodynamic analyses
of SARS-CoV-2. Virus Res 287, 198098.
40. Lu J, du Plessis L, Liu Z, Hill V, Kang M, Lin H, et al. (2020). Genomic Epidemiology of SARSCoV-2 in Guangdong Province, China. Cell 181, 997-1003 e1009.
41. Li X, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Zhao Q, Li Y, ChaillonA. (2020a). Transmission dynamics and
evolutionary history of 2019-nCoV. J Med Virol 92, 501-511.
41. van Dorp L, Acman M, Richard D, Shaw LP, Ford CE, Ormond L, et al. (2020). Emergence of
genomic diversity and recurrent mutations in SARS-CoV-2. Infect Genet Evol 83, 104351.
42. Volz E, Baguelin M, Bhatia S, Boonyasiri A, Cori A, Cucunubá Z, et al. (2020). Report 5:
Phylogenetic analysis of SARS-CoV-2. Imperial College London. doi:10.25561/7716943. ChavarriaMiró G, Anfruns-Estrada E, Guix S, Paraira M, Galofré B, Sánchez G, et al. (2020). Sentinel
surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater anticipates the occurrence of COVID-19 cases. medRxiv..
44. La Rosa G, Mancini P, Bonanno Ferraro G, Veneri C, Iaconelli M, Bonadonna L, et al. (2021).
SARS-CoV-2 has been circulating in northern Italy since December 2019: Evidence from
environmental monitoring. Sci Total Environ 750, 141711.
45. Amendola A, Bianchi S, Gori M, Colzani D, Canuti M, Borghi E, et al. (2021). Evidence of SARSCoV-2 RNA in an Oropharyngeal Swab Specimen, Milan, Italy, Early December 2019. Emerg Infect
Dis 27, 648-650.
46. Giovanetti M, Benvenuto D, Angeletti S, Ciccozzi M. (2020). The first two cases of 2019-nCoV in
Italy: Where they come from? J Med Virol 92, 518-521.
46a. Apolone G, Montomoli E, Manenti A, Boeri M, Sabia F, Hyseni I, Mazzini L, Martinuzzi D,
Cantone L, Milanese G, Sestini S, Suatoni P, Marchianò A, Bollati V, Sozzi G, Pastorino U. Unexpected
detection of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the prepandemic period in Italy. Tumori. 2020 Nov
11:300891620974755. doi: 10.1177/0300891620974755. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 33176598.
47. Deslandes A, Berti V, Tandjaoui-Lambotte Y, Alloui C, Carbonnelle E, Zahar JR, et al. (2020).
SARS-CoV-2 was already spreading in France in late December 2019. Int J Antimicrob Agents 55,
106006.
47a. Carrat F, Figoni J, Henny J, Desenclos JC, Kab S, de Lamballerie X, Zins M. Evidence of early
circulation of SARS-CoV-2 in France: findings from the population-based "CONSTANCES" cohort.
Eur J Epidemiol. 2021 Feb 6:1–4. doi: 10.1007/s10654-020-00716-2. Epub ahead of print. PMID:
33548003; PMCID: PMC7864798.
90

48. Fongaro G, Stoco PH, Souza DSM, Grisard EC, Magri ME, Rogovski P, et al. (2020). SARS-CoV2 in human sewage in Santa Catalina, Brazil, November 2019. medRxiv.
doi:10.1101/2020.06.26.20140731.
49. Stringari LL, de Souza MN, de Medeiros Junior NF, Goulart JP, Giuberti C, Dietze R, RibeiroRodrigues, R. (2021). Covert cases of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2: An obscure
but present danger in regions endemic for Dengue and Chikungunya viruses. PLoS One 16, e0244937.
50. Basavaraju SV, Patton ME, Grimm K, Rasheed MAU, Lester S, Mills L, et al. (2020). Serologic
testing of U.S. blood donations to identify SARS-CoV-2-reactive antibodies: December 2019-January
2020. Clin Infect Dis.
51. Zhang YZ, Holmes EC (2020). A Genomic Perspective on the Origin and Emergence of SARSCoV-2. Cell 181, 223-227.
52. Wei X, Li X, Cui J. (2020). Evolutionary perspectives on novel coronaviruses identified in
pneumonia cases in China. Natl Sci Rev 7, 239-242.
53. Xu X, Chen P, Wang J, Feng J, Zhou H, Li X, et al. (2020). Evolution of the novel coronavirus from
the ongoing Wuhan outbreak and modeling of its spike protein for risk of human transmission. Sci
China Life Sci 63, 457-460.
54. Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. (2020). Genomic characterisation and epidemiology
of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 395, 565-574.
55. Hul V, Delaune D, Karlsson EA, Hassanin A, Tey PO, Baidaliuk A, et al. (2021). A novel SARSCoV-2 related coronavirus in bats from Cambodia. bioRxiv. doi:10.1101/2021.01.26.428212:
2021.2001.2026.428212.
55a. Wacharapluesadee S, Tan CW, Maneeorn P, Duengkae P, Zhu F, Joyjinda Y et al., Evidence for
SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses circulating in bats and pangolins in Southeast Asia. Nature
Communications 12, 972 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21240-1.
55b. Shahhosseini N, Wong G, Kobinger GP, Chinikar S. SARS-CoV-2 spillover transmission due to
recombination event. Gene Rep. 2021 Jun;23:101045. doi: 10.1016/j.genrep.2021.101045. Epub 2021
Feb 16. PMID: 33615041; PMCID: PMC7884226
56. Xiao K, Zhai J, Feng Y, Zhou N, Zhang X, Zou JJ, et al. (2020). Isolation of SARS-CoV-2-related
coronavirus from Malayan pangolins. Nature 583, 286-289.
57. Ou X, Liu Y,. Lei X, Li P, Mi D, Ren L, et al. (2020). Characterization of spike glycoprotein of
SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. Nat Commun 11, 1620.
58. Qu XX, Hao P, Song XJ, Jiang SM, Liu YX, Wang PG, et al. (2005). Identification of two critical
amino acid residues of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein for its variation
in zoonotic tropism transition via a double substitution strategy. J Biol Chem 280, 29588-29595.
59. Ren W, Qu X, Li W, Han Z, Yu M, Zhou P, et al. (2008). Difference in receptor usage between severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus and SARS-like coronavirus of bat origin. J Virol 82,
1899-1907.
60. Wan Y, Shang J, Graham R, Baric RS, Li F. (2020). Receptor Recognition by the Novel Coronavirus
from Wuhan: an Analysis Based on Decade-Long Structural Studies of SARS Coronavirus. J Virol 94.
doi:10.1128/JVI.00127-20.
61. Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett KS, Goldsmith JA, Hsieh CL, Abiona, O, et al. (2020). Cryo-EM
structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science 367, 1260-1263.
62. Lam TT, Jia N, Zhang YW, Shum MH, Jiang JF, Zhu HC, et al. (2020). Identifying SARS-CoV-2related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins. Nature 583, 282-285.
63. Wong MC, Javornik Cregeen SJ, Ajami NJ, Petrosino JF (2020). Evidence of recombination in
coronaviruses implicating pangolin origins of nCoV-2019. bioRxiv. doi: 10.1101/2020.02.07.939207.
64. Liu P, Jiang JZ, Wan XF, Hua Y, Li L, Zhou J, et al. (2020). Are pangolins the intermediate host of
the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)? PLoS Pathog 16, e1008421.
65. Ji W, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Li X. (2020). Cross-species transmission of the newly identified
coronavirus 2019-nCoV. J Med Virol 92, 433-440.
66. Murakami S, Kitamura T, Suzuki J, Sato R, Aoi T, Fujii M, et al. (2020). Detection and
Characterization of Bat Sarbecovirus Phylogenetically Related to SARS-CoV-2, Japan. Emerg Infect
Dis 26, 3025-3029.
67. Leroy EM, Ar Gouilh M, Brugere-Picoux J. (2020). The risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission to pets
91

and other wild and domestic animals strongly mandates a one-health strategy to control the COVID-19
pandemic. One Health 10, 100133.
68. Molenaar RJ, Vreman S, Hakze-van der Honing RW, Zwart R, de Rond J, Weesendorp E, et al.
(2020). Clinical and Pathological Findings in SARS-CoV-2 Disease Outbreaks in Farmed Mink
(Neovison vison). Vet Pathol 57, 653-657.
69. Hammer AS, Quaade ML, Rasmussen TB, Fonager J, Rasmussen M, Mundbjerg K, et al. (2021).
SARS-CoV-2 Transmission between Mink (Neovison vison) and Humans, Denmark. Emerg Infect Dis
27, 547-551.
70. Shuai L, Zhong G, Yuan Q, Wen Z, Wang C, He X, et al. (2020). Replication, pathogenicity, and
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in minks. Nat Sci Rev. doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwaa291.

ANIMAL AND ENVIRONMENT STUDIES
Introduction
Nearly three quarters of emerging human infectious diseases have animal reservoirs, including wildlife
(for instance, bats, primates, rodents and birds) and domesticated animals (such as poultry, pigs and
camels).(1, 2) For example, in recent years, A/H5N1, A/H5N6, A/H7N9 and other avian influenza
viruses have infected humans after cross-species transmission from live birds; and publications suggest
that henipaviruses have emerged in people after being transmitted from bat reservoir hosts via
domesticated intermediate hosts (horses and pigs).(3, 4) These and other zoonotic viruses have been
responsible for some of the most significant emerging disease threats to human health and economic
development.
Research on wildlife reservoirs of some of these zoonoses have revealed a high diversity of related
viruses distributed globally (for example, within the coronaviruses of the Sarbecovirus subgenus or
Merbecovirus subgenus carried by bats, or the hantaviruses carried by rodents).(5-10) In appropriate
conditions, these viruses break through the interspecies barrier, infect humans and cause epidemics or
pandemics. Analyses show that these spillover events are driven by factors that include large-scale
environmental and socioeconomic changes, including land use change, deforestation, agricultural
expansion and intensification, trade in wildlife, and expansion of human settlements.(11, 12)
The coronaviruses now endemic in humans that emerged in our recent past (such as HCoV-HKU1,
HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E) are thought to have originated in cattle, rodents, bats or
birds, but the exact circumstances of their spillover are not known.(13-15) SARS-CoV-2 is also thought
to have its ecological niche in an animal reservoir.(16) It is a member of a clade of betacoronaviruses
(SARS-related CoVs) that is almost exclusively found in bats (5), and the viruses most closely related
to it were identified in Rhinolophus spp. (horseshoe) bats sampled in Yunnan Province in China
(RaTG13 and RmYN02),(16, 17) in Japan (Rc-o139),(18) in Cambodia (RshSTT182 and
RshSTT200),(19) and in Thailand (RacCS203).(20) Two other closely-related viruses with 85.5% to
92.4% sequence similarity to SARS-CoV-2 were sequenced from custom-seized trafficked Malayan
pangolins that were housed in rehabilitation facilities in Guangxi and Guangdong provinces, China.(21)
Two other β-coronaviruses (MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV) have caused largescale epidemics in people,
but their exact origins remain elusive. However, CoVs with high sequence similarities with SARS-CoV
or MERS-CoV have been identified in bats.(22, 23) Evidence suggests that dromedary camels are the
intermediate host of MERS-CoV, and data suggest that civets or related species may be the intermediate
host of SARS-CoV.(24, 25) Although no intermediate hosts have so far been implicated in the origin
of COVID-19, a range of species can be infected by SARS-CoV-2 experimentally (for example, raccoon
dogs, ferrets, rabbits, cats, golden Syrian hamsters, bats, macaques, marmosets and white-tailed deer)
or by presumed or demonstrated exposure to humans with COVID-19 (for example, mink, gorillas,
captive large felids, domesticated cats and dogs).(26) Cattle, pigs and poultry are not thought to be
receptive to infection with SARS-CoV-2 (see Annex F, Tables 1 and 2).
92

Although the exact route of exposure of people to the putative wildlife reservoir or potential
intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV-2 is unknown, circumstantial evidence supports a range of potential
spillover pathways. Direct spillover from bats to humans may have occurred, or as with MERS-CoV
and likely SARS-CoV, transmission to humans may have involved an intermediate host. Candidate
intermediate host species may include mink, pangolins, rabbits, raccoon dogs and domesticated cats
that can be infected by SARS-CoV-2,(26) or species such as civets and ferret badgers and related
mustelids that were shown to be infected by SARS-CoV during the outbreak in Guangdong Province,
China. (25) Spillover of viruses from animals to humans can occur through direct contact with infected
animals, indirectly through animal products or excreta, or via intermediate hosts.(25) Therefore, the
investigations so far conducted focused on the Huanan market and included a comprehensive sampling
plan bearing such transmission routes in mind. The study in the Huanan Market was designed on the
basis of these scientific principles. Here, the focus on animals and animal products is described. Other
potential routes for the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in people associated with the Huanan market in late
2019 include exposure to contaminated animal meat or food products that are refrigerated or frozen, or
the introduction of the virus by people infected elsewhere.
Three recent COVID-19 outbreaks in China have been linked to exposure to imported refrigerated or
frozen seafood products.(27-30) An outbreak in Beijing linked to the Xinfadi market was first identified
on 11 June 2020 after 56 days without a single known community case of COVID-19 in Beijing. Full
genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of publicly available genomes suggests that the virus
was from the L lineage European branch 1 with specific mutations characteristic to the market outbreak.
However, it is not possible to fully infer the source of contamination from this work yet (31). In October
2020, an outbreak occurred in Qingdao. (32) The index cases for the cluster were two dock workers
from the city’s port with no history of travel or recognized contact with anyone with confirmed COVID19; the only epidemiological link which could be established between the cases was exposure to SARSCoV-2 on the surface of cold-chain packaging. In addition, SARS-CoV-2 viruses were isolated from
swabs of the outside surfaces of imported cold-chain packages in Qingdao(33). Based on these
observations, China has launched a programme for systematic screening of packaged frozen imported
food. Although re-introduction of a pandemic virus to epidemic-free areas can occur via various
transmission routes including imported goods during a pandemic, the similarities between the outbreaks
in the Beijing Xinfadi market and Qingdao, leading to the consideration of potential introduction of the
virus through frozen products into the Huanan market in late 2019.(34) For research focusing on the
origin of SARS-CoV-2, this will need to be aligned with sources of those products.
In this report, published and unpublished surveillance studies and surveys conducted in China were
reviewed according to clearly defined objectives, differentiating studies that investigated the origin of
SARS-CoV-2 from those that aim to identify potential infection of animals by COVID-19-infected
people. These surveys included environmental, products and animal sampling as part of the initial
outbreak investigation and a detailed review of the supply chain of the Huanan market. Retrospective
testing of samples from wildlife and livestock animals in China was also conducted and the results
included.

Methods
1. Sample collection
(1) Environmental samples: Using full personal protective equipment, investigators applied
sampling swabs to the floors, walls or surfaces of objects and then preserved them in virus preservation
solution. Swabs and virus preservation solution were commercial products (Disposable Virus Sampling
Tube, V5-S-25, Shen Zhen Zi Jian Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China).
93

(2) Animal samples: Depending on the type of animal and whether it was alive or frozen,
pharyngeal, anal, body surface and body cavity swabs or tissue samples were collected for nucleic acid
testing (NAT), and blood samples from domesticated animals were collected for serum antibody tests.
(3) Sewage (silt) samples: Collected by the use of virus sampling swabs to probe into the silt at the
bottom of drainage channels in the market, sewage and silt samples were preserved in virus preservation
solution (Disposable Virus Sampling Tube, V5-S-25, Shen Zhen Zi Jian Biotechnology Co., Ltd.,
Shenzhen, China); for the sewage well, a container was used to take a silt-water mixture from a location
near the bottom of the well, and an appropriate amount of sample was collected by using virus sampling
swabs and then preserved in virus preservation solution (Disposable Virus Sampling Tube, V5-S-25,
Shen Zhen Zi Jian Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China).
2. Nucleic acid extraction
A virus nucleic acid extraction kit (Xi'an Tianlong) was used to extract viral nucleic acid from samples
using an automated nucleic acid extraction instrument according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
3. SARS-CoV-2 real-time PCR assay
Real-time (RT) PCR was performed on extracted nucleic acid samples with a SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid assay kit. The reagent brands include BioGerm (40/38, cycle number/cut-off value, the same as
below), DAAN (45/40), and BGI (40/38).
4、Animal coronavirus test
An RT-PCR method was used to complete surveys for animal coronaviruses. The primers were
designed and synthesized by China Animal Health and Epidemiology Center (CAHEC), and the relative
papers and patents are being prepared and will be submitted soon.
5. Metagenomic sequencing of positive samples
Metagenomic sequencing was conducted at Wuhan BGI. Nucleic acid was extracted using Qiagen's
viral RNA microextraction kit and human nucleic acid was removed using an enrichment kit to improve
the sensitivity of viral RNA detection. Extracted RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA and
segmented into 150-200 bp by enzyme digestion. After repair, fitting, purification, PCR amplification
and purification, sample concentration was assayed and SE50+10 sequencing performed by DNBSEQT7, and an average output of more than 200 million reads was obtained. Sequencing data were compared
with those in a SARS-CoV-2 database to determine whether the samples contained coronavirus
sequences.
6. Serological testing
(1) SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody screening
Initial screening for serum SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies was done using a double-antigen
sandwich ELISA. This kit has been used in animal infection models in relevant laboratories in China
and has been shown effective for both animal and human samples. (35)
(2) SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody confirmation
Samples with positive ELISA results were confirmed using a neutralization assay.

Results
Environmental sampling and description of vendors at the Huanan market
94

Environmental samples in the Huanan market were collected to represent exhaustively as possible, from
a wide diversity of surfaces, animals and products (Table 1). Some environmental samples tested
positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, and the virus was isolated from some of these samples. The
distribution of positive environmental samples was assessed relative to sites where people with early
cases had worked and the types of products sold.
Huanan market was officially closed on 1 January 2020 and on early morning of that same day China
CDC began collecting environmental and animal samples. Staff from China CDC entered the market
about 30 times before the market’s final clean-up on 2 March 2020. The environmental and animal
samples in and around the market were collected according to different sampling principles.
The range of in-market sampling covered: (1) environmental samples from stalls related to early cases;
(2) environmental samples from doors and floors of all stalls in the blocks where the early cases were
located; (3) environmental samples in the east wing of the market were collected according to blocks;
(4) transport carts, trash cans and similar objects; (5) environmental samples from stalls that sold
livestock, poultry, farmed wildlife (also called “domesticated wildlife” or “domesticated wildlife
products” in this report); (6) samples of sewage and silt from drainage channels and sewerage wells;
(7) stray cats, mice and other potential vector animals in the market; (8) animal products and other
commodity samples kept in the cold storages and refrigerators in the market; (9) the market’s ventilation
and air-conditioning system; and (10) public toilets, public activity rooms and other places where people
gathered in the market.
At the same time, environmental or animal samples were collected from other sites, mainly including:
(1) other markets around the Huanan market; (2) sewerage wells in the neighbouring communities of
the Huanan market; (3) animal products and other commodities stored in warehouses and cold-storage
facilities related to the Huanan market and the environment; and (4) stray cats from around the Huanan
market.
Between 1 January 2020 and 2 March 2020, 923 environmental samples were collected and tested,
among which 73 samples were SARS-CoV-2 NAT positive. Among the positive samples, 69 were
environmental samples from or related to the Huanan market, of which 61 were collected from or related
to the west area of the market. The other four samples were collected from other markets or community
sewerage wells in Wuhan. The PCR cycle threshold (Ct) values of most samples ranged from 23.9 to
41.7, and SARS-CoV-2 strains were successfully isolated from three samples with Ct values below 30
(Table 1).

Table 1. Overview of environment sample sampling and testing in the Huanan market

Huanan market
Warehouses related to the Huanan
market
Other markets in Wuhan*
Drainage system in the Huanan
market
Sewerage wells in surrounding
areas
Total

Number of Number positive by
samples
RT-PCR

Number
isolated from

718

40

3

14

5

30

1

110

24

51

3

923

73

*The other markets were Dongxihu Market and Huanggang Center Market.
95

3

virus

The nature of merchants’ activities was assessed against the NAT results of the environmental samples.
The sampling covered 19.8% (134/678) of vendors in the market (95% confidence interval (CI): 16.823.0%). Of the positive samples, 60% (44/73) were distributed among 21 vendors in the market (95%
CI: 48.1-71.5%), 19 of whom were located in the west area of Huanan market and the remaining two
located in the east area (Table 2). Some vendors sold more than one product type, leading to differences
in the denominators: 16/87 (18.4%) of vendors selling cold-chain products were positive (95% CI: 10.928.1%) while five did not; 13/73 (17.8%) of the vendors selling aquatic products were positive (95%
CI: 9.8-28.5); six of the vendors selling seafood products were positive (11%, 6/56: 95% CI: 4-21.9%),
eight of the vendors selling poultry were positive (22%, 8/37: 95% CI: 9.8-38.2%), five of the vendors
selling livestock were positive (14%, 5/36: 95% CI: 4.7-29.5%), one vendor selling wildlife products
was positive (11%, 1/9: 95% CI: 0.3-48.2%) and two vendors who sold vegetables were positive (25%,
2/8: 95% CI: 3.2-65%) (See Figure 1). While these results provide some indication of association of
cases with different products, further analyses are required to identify their significance. Of the 110
samples collected from sewers or sewerage wells in the market, 24 samples were positive for SARSCoV-2 nucleic acid, suggesting that either contaminated sewage may have played a role in the cluster
of cases in the market or that infected people in the market contaminated the sewage.

Table 2. Twenty-one vendors of NAT test positive in Huanan market.

Vendors No.

Location

1
West
2
West
3
West
4
East
5
West
6
West
7
West
8
West
9
West
10
West
11
West
12
West
13
West
14
West
15
West
16
West
17
West
18
West
19
West
20
West
21
East
Sum of NAT positive vendors
Vendors sampled in the study
selling such products

Cold-chain
products
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
16

Aquatic
products
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
13

87

73

96

Product types
Seafood
Pou
products
ltry
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
6
8
56

37

Lives
tock
+
+
+
+
+
5

Wildlife
products
+
1

Veget
ables
+
+
2

36

9

8

Figure 1: Positive environmental samples associated with different products in the Huanan
Market. Dots represent the percentage of positive environmental samples associated with each
product. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals for the binomials in the text above. Note that
the CI for some products (e.g. vegetables, farmed wildlife) have broad error bars that are likely
due to the low number of vendors for these categories in the market. Nine of the 10 vendors selling
farmed wildlife have been sampled.
The typical coronavirus morphology was observed by transmission electron microscopy in the strains
isolated from three environmental samples (see Annex F, Figs. 1 and 2), two of which were from the
stalls with confirmed patients. Genome sequences of the three isolated strains were obtained by
applying high-throughput sequencing technology (sequences uploaded to GISAID). Through
comparison with the SARS-CoV-2 reference strains from the cases, the consistency is more than 99.9%,
suggesting that the three strains may have originated from the contamination by infected persons'
expelled virus. (Sequencing data of the three strains were analysed and presented in the molecular
epidemiology working group’s report.)

Animals, supply chains and professional customers in the Huanan market
The profile of the animal businesses, supply chains, and downstream sales in the Huanan market and
other markets were reviewed and no significant changes were reported in the period leading up to the
epidemic and the closure of the market. Extensive collection and testing of animal samples in the market
and animals in upstream supply farms took place; the SARS-CoV-2 PCR test results were all negative.

(1) Animal selling and supply chain in the market
Discussions with the authority of market regulation and supervision, and review of records obtained
identified 10 animal-selling stalls in the Huanan market, accounting for 1.5% of the total. They were
located in the south-western corner of the west area and the north-western corner of the east area (see
Figure 2). The authority of market regulation and supervision verified that there was no substantial
change in the type of animal business in these 10 stalls in the 12 months before the outbreak.

97

Figure 2: Map of the Huanan Market, showing locations of stalls where domesticated wildlife
products were sold in relation to environmental testing results, and confirmed human cases of
COVID-19.
According to sales records, in late December 2019, 10 animal stalls sold animals or products from n,
snakes, avian species (chickens, ducks, gooses, pheasants and doves), Sika deer, badgers, rabbits,
bamboo rats, porcupines, hedgehogs, salamanders, giant salamanders, bay crocodiles and Siamese
crocodiles, among which snakes, salamanders and crocodiles were traded as live animals (Annex F,
Table 3). Other products sold were frozen goods or bai tiao (remaining parts of poultry or livestock
after removal of hair and viscera). Snakes and salamanders were slaughtered before being sold, but
crocodiles were alive when sold.
The sources of farmed wildlife within Hubei Province included other local markets in Wuhan or farms
in Tianmen, Xiaogan, Jingmen, Suizhou, Jianli, Xiangyang, Huangshi, Wuxue and Jingshan. The
sources outside Hubei Province included farms in the following provinces: Heilongjiang, Jilin, Shanxi,
Henan, Hunan, Jiangxi, Guangdong, Guangxi and Yunnan. No living or dead animals of foreign origin
were identified from the sales records in late December 2019.
Market authorities have confirmed that all reported live and frozen animals sold in the Huanan market
were from farms that were legally licensed for breeding and quarantine, and that no illegal trade in
wildlife has been found. Although there is photographic evidence in a published paper that live
mammals were sold at the Huanan market in the past (2014) (36) (date confirmed by author in statement
in Annex F) and unverified media reports in 2020, no verified reports of live mammals being sold
around 2019 were found.
On-site visits and telephone interviews by the market supervision authority with the owners and vendors
of the 10 animal stalls in the Huanan market suggest that all the downstream customers of animal sales
were retail customers. Further information on the Huanan market characteristics are given in the
description of the site visit by the WHO-China joint team (see Annex D5).

(2) Animal sample testing in the market
98

A total of 457 animal-related samples from 188 individuals of 18 species were collected and tested
between 1st January and 2nd March. The sources of the samples include unsold goods kept in
refrigerators and freezers in the Huanan market, goods kept in warehouses and refrigerators related to
the Huanan market, vector animals such as stray cats and dogs (including animal faeces) in the market,
and animal products sold in other markets in Wuhan. The animal species include rabbit, snake, badger,
cat, bamboo rat, rat, chicken, and salamander, etc. All samples were SARS-CoV-2 NAT negative
(Tables 3 and 4). The badgers were carcasses found in freezers and were identified visually. DNA
barcoding has not yet been conducted on them to verify their identity.
At the same time, samples from animals raised by some Huanan market suppliers in Hubei were also
sampled and tested between February and March 2020 (Table 5.1). Meanwhile, SARS-CoV-2
surveillance within wild animals were also done in some other provinces (Table 5.2). Altogether 2480
samples were collected and tested, and the results were all NAT negative (Table 5).
Table 3. Results of animal samples testing within and outside Huanan Market
Collection sites

Sample number RT-PCR positive number

Huanan market
Warehouses related to the Huanan market
Cats, rats and other vectors and their droppings
Wuhan and other surrounding markets
Total

327
32
92
6
457

0
0
0
0
0

Table 4. Details of animal samples within and outside Huanan Market
Species
Rabbit/Hares
Stray cat
Snake
Hedgehog
Muntjac
Dog
Badger
Bamboo rat
Mouse
Pig
Chicken
Chinese giant salamander
Crocodile
Wild boar
Soft-shelled turtle
Weasel
Fish
Sheep
Others
Total

Sample
number
104
80a
80
67
18
17
16
15
12
6b
5
5
4
4
3
2
2
1
16
457

Animal
number
52
27
40
16
6
7
6
6
10
NA c
5
3
2
2
2
1
2
1
NA c
188
99

RT-PCR
positive number
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Remarks

Including faeces

Including one stray dog

Captured around the market

Captured around the market

a

Six of the cats were from the Huanan market.
Other markets.
c
Not applicable.
b

Table 5.1. Survey of animals from Huanan market suppliers in Hubei
Nucleic Acid Testing (NAT）
Hubei
Number of species
10
Specific types of Bamboo Rat, Porcupine,
animals
Ostrich/Turkey, Wild Boar
Total sample size
616
Test results
Negative

Duck,

Snake,

Rabbit/Hare,

Chicken,

Table 5.2. Survey of wild animals from Yunnan, Guangdong and Guangxi for the SARS-CoV-2 NAT
Nucleic Acid Testing (NAT）
Yunnan
Number of
27
species
Specific
Chinese pangolin, Malay pangolin, Civet cat,
types
of Rhinolophus affinis bat, Miniopterus schreibersi bat,
animals
Bamboo rat, Macaque, Bear monkey, Porcupine, Fox, etc.
Total sample
1287
size
Test results
Negative

Guangdong

Guangxi

1

1

Pangolin

Pangolin

92

485

Negative

Negative

National domestic animal testing
In order to conduct a widespread scan of potential indicators of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 in animals,
or evidence of potential animal sources of infection, samples from a range of animal species across the
country were tested. The SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody and NAT results show no positive results in
livestock and poultry tested before and after the COVID-19 epidemic. The survey did not find evidence
for enzootic presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the main food animals (pigs, cattle, sheep, chicken).

(1) Results of SARS-CoV-2 specific antibody testing
In 2019, as part of routine animal surveillance aimed at investigating the epidemic situation of major
animal diseases in China, a total of 5638 livestock and poultry serum samples were collected from 31
provinces across China, including 946 pig, 1002 bovine, 962 sheep, 2479 chicken, 215 duck, and 34
goose sera. Samples came from 222 farms, including 130 small and medium-sized farms, 67 scattered
households in towns and villages, and 25 slaughterhouses. A retrospective study was performed to test
whether these samples contained antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. In 2020, a total of 6070 livestock
and poultry serum samples were collected from 31 provinces across the country, including 1045 pig,
767 bovine, 1058 sheep, 3,030 chicken, 169 duck and one goose sera. Sera came from 240 farms,
including 135 small and medium-sized farms, 78 scattered households in towns and villages, and 27
slaughterhouses. All of the results of the SARS-CoV-2-specific antibody tests performed during 2020
were all negative (Table 6).

100

Table 6. Location, species and number of livestock and poultry individuals tested for SARS-CoV2-specific antibodies. Samples were collected in 2019 and 2020 and tested in 2020
Location

Goose

Beijing
0
Tianjin
0
Hebei
0
Shanxi
0
Inner Mongolia
0
Liaoning
0
Ji Lin
0
Heilongjiang
0
Shanghai
0
Jiangsu
0
Zhejiang
0
Anhui
0
Fujian
0
Jiangxi
0
Shandong
1
Henan
0
Hubei
0
Hunan
0
Guangdong
0
Guangxi
0
Hainan
34
Chongqing
0
Sichuan
0
Guizhou
0
Yunnan
0
Tibet
0
Shaanxi
0
Qinghai
0
Gansu
0
Ningxia
0
Xinjiang
0
Xinjiang Production
0
and Construction Corps
Total
35

Duck

Chicken

Sheep

Cattle

Pig

In total

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
11
30
0
0
94
0
35
0
20
0
60
95
39
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

180
208
200
197
191
177
177
184
185
162
191
198
96
185
157
196
165
198
140
95
127
200
192
191
200
100
199
193
100
183
168

94
60
15
90
80
66
35
0
95
71
55
80
46
40
55
33
15
75
75
50
90
70
97
70
20
80
39
70
120
94
100

15
80
95
19
70
44
95
110
15
39
40
30
64
55
55
76
75
35
35
60
20
40
13
40
90
95
71
80
78
35
30

70
50
70
70
30
70
50
69
70
70
70
70
70
85
50
70
99
70
70
70
70
70
70
69
69
15
70
30
15
50
50

359
398
380
376
371
357
357
363
376
372
356
378
370
365
353
375
374
378
380
370
380
380
372
370
379
290
379
373
313
362
348

0

174

40

70

70

354

384

5509

2020

1769

1991

11708

(2) Retrospective testing of livestock and poultry using SARS-CoV-2 NAT
A total of 12 092 animal tissue and swab samples, collected in 2018-2019 from 26 provinces and
autonomous regions, including Heilongjiang, Liaoning, Tianjin, Hebei, Fujian, Anhui, Shandong,
Henan, Hunan, Guangxi, Guangdong, Yunnan, Sichuan, Shaanxi, Xinjiang, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Ningxia,
Tibet, Jilin, Shanghai, Hubei, Zhejiang, Qinghai, Inner Mongolia and Guizhou, were tested for SARSCoV-2 nucleic acid, including: 5000 pig, 131 cattle, 368 sheep, and 6593 poultry samples. The sample
information is shown in Table 7. They have been tested retrospectively for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid,
and the results are all negative.
101

Table 7. Location, species and number of livestock and poultry individuals tested using SARSCoV-2-NAT. Samples were collected in 2018 and 2019 and tested in 2020

Location
Heilongjiang
Liaoning
Tianjin
Hebei
Fujian
Anhui
Shandong
Henan
Hunan
Guangxi
Guangdong
Yunnan
Sichuan
Shaanxi
Xinjiang
Guizhou
Jilin
Jiangsu
Inner Mongolia
Shanghai
Zhejiang
Hubei
Jiangxi
Ningxia
Qinghai
Tibet
Total

Cattle
Sample
number
40

Sample
type
Tissue

20

Tissue

14

Tissue

46

Tissue

11

Sheep
Sample
number

Sample
type

127

Swab

122
119

Swab
Swab

Tissue

Pig
Sample
number
235
213
215
354
258
292
821
811
290
497
384
203
280
12
135

Sample type
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab
Tissue/Swab

Poultry
Sample
number
102
87
403
645
105
340
601
413
86
390
366
326
691
79
65
379
130
160

131

368

5000

326
305
267
105
222
6593

Sample
type
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab/Feces
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab
Swab/Feces
Swab
Swab
Swab

(3) Animal coronavirus test results
A subset of 26 807 samples of different animals stored in 2019-2020 from 24 provinces and autonomous
regions, including Heilongjiang, Shanghai, Liaoning, Tianjin, Hebei, Fujian, Anhui, Shandong, Henan,
Hunan, Hubei, Guangxi, Guangdong, Yunnan, Sichuan, Shaanxi, Xinjiang, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Ningxia,
Tibet, Zhejiang, Inner Mongolia and Shanxi, were tested using NAT with pan-coronavirus and SARSCoV-2 primer sets. Primers were designed and synthesized by China Animal Health and Epidemiology
Center (CAHEC), and the relative papers and patents are being prepared and will be submitted soon.
The results of SARS-CoV-2 NAT were all negative, and 1711 samples tested for pan-coronavirus NAT
were positive. Animal coronaviruses detected include: 1095 samples with avian infectious bronchitis
virus, 167 samples with duck coronavirus, 50 samples with pigeon coronavirus, 25 samples with avian
deltacoronavirus, 151 samples with porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus, and 36 samples with porcine
transmissible gastroenteritis virus, six samples with porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus,
one sample with porcine del coronavirus, 74 samples with bovine coronavirus, 14 samples with mink
coronavirus, 74 samples with feline coronavirus and 18 samples with canine coronavirus, as shown in
102

Fig. 1. The genetic evolution analysis showed that the genetic distance between these viruses and SARSCoV-2 was far (homology ≤54.2%), and there was no evidence of SARS-CoV-2 in domestic animals,
poultry and pets.
Avian infectious bronchitis (1095)
duck coronavirus (167)

6

151

36

14

74 18

Pigeon coronavirus (501)

1

Avain delta coronavirus (25)

74

Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea (151)

25
Transmissible gastroenteritis of swine
(36)
Porcine hemagglutinating
encephalomyelitis (6)
Porcine delta coronavirus (1)

50
167

Bovine coronavirus (74)
mink coronavirus (14)

1095

feline coronavirus (74)

canine coronavirus (18)

Fig. 2. Animal coronaviruses detected in livestock and farmed animals. Samples were
collected in 2019 and 2020 and tested in 2020

Further testing of livestock and captive wildlife for SARS-CoV-2
The results of SARS-CoV-2-specific NAT and serology of wild animal samples collected and stored
from 2015 to 2020 were all negative, and no anomaly was found in the national surveillance system for
wild animal disease in China.
(1) Results of SARS-CoV-2 specific antibody testing
In total, 1914 serum samples were collected from 35 different species between November 2019 and
March 2020. No SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies were detected (Table 8).
Table 8. Testing (by ELISA) of livestock, domesticated animals and captive wildlife during the
epidemic period (Wuhan and surrounding areas, November 2019 – March 2020). (35)
Species
Pig
Cow
Sheep
Horse
Chicken
Duck
Goose
Mice
Rat
Guinea pig
Rabbit
Monkey
Dog
Cat

Number
tested
187
107
133
18
153
153
25
81
67
30
34
39
487
87
103

Result
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Camel
Fox
Mink
Alpaca
Ferret
Bamboo rat
Peacock
Eagle
Tiger
Rhinoceros
Pangolin
Leopard cat
Jackal
Giant panda
Masked
civet
Porcupine
Bear
Yellowthroated
marten
Weasel
Red pandas
Wild boar

31
89
91
10
2
8
4
1
8
4
17
3
1
14
10

Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

2
9
4

Negative
Negative
Negative

1
3
1

Negative
Negative
Negative

(2) Results of SARS-CoV-2 NAT
In total, 648 samples (tissue, swab, blood and faeces) from 90 captive animals (nine species), including
red pandas, white foxes, badgers, civets, bamboo rats, porcupines, guinea pigs and macaques, were
collected between 8 February and 11 March 2020 in Wuhan, Dazhi, Yangxin, Jingmen, Jiangling and
several provinces other than Hubei, and the SARS-CoV-2 NAT results were all negative.
After 8 April 2020, 2995 samples of 37 species of captive or farmed wildlife, including bamboo rats,
porcupines, guineapigs and macaques, were collected in 14 cities in Hubei Province. The results of
SARS-CoV-2 NAT were all negative.
Between May and September 2020, 27 000 samples of wild animals were collected in China, including
primates, lagomorphs, artiodactyls, chiropterans, rodents and many kinds of wild birds (including
Galliformes, Passeriformes and storks). All SARS-CoV-2 NAT were negative (Table 9).
Table 9. Survey of wildlife (captive) in China for SARS-CoV-2 NAT, post-epidemic in Wuhan
(after March 2020).

Number of
species
Specific types
of animals

Nucleic Acid Testing (NAT）
Hubei Province
Nationwide
74
208
Yunnan
horse,
Pony, Green guenons, Green iguanas, Green monkeys,
Kangaroo, Arctic fox, Dezhou Bactrian camels, Horned owls, Dwarf musk deer,
donkey, leopard, Ocelot, Hyenas, Falcons, Cheetahs, Cinnamon bittern,
Tibetan
macaque,
Red- Northwest wolves, Blue macaws, Cockatoos,
necked kangaroo, Skunk, Snub-nosed monkey, Leopards, Festival-tail
Sichuan horse, Elephant, monkeys, Wildebeest, Muntjacs, Grey parrots,
Giant panda, Siberian tiger, Grey rock rats, Grey owls, Grey wolves, Grey
Sheep, Auricular fox, African kangaroos, Grey monkeys, Reeves’s muntjac,
104

Total sample
size
Test results

lion, Baboon, Dog, Civet,
Nutria, Porcupine, River
muntjac, Golden monkey,
Black bear, Red fox, Fruit bat,
Pangolin, Tiglon, South
China
tiger,
Ring-tailed
lemur, Raccoon, Yellow
muntjac, Grey kangaroo,
Muntjacs,
Snub-nosed
monkey, Grey wolf, Dwarf
musk deer, Bactrian camel,
Mongolian horse, Red deer,
Yak, Sika deer, Stump-tailed
macaque, Squirrel, Argali,
Grey goat, Muskrat, Black
goat, Capybara, Red squirrels,
Squirrel monkey, Prairie dog,
Guinea
pig,
Pig-footed
bandicoot, Northwest wolf,
Tibetan wild ass, Meerkat,
Xiang Pig, Panda, Alpaca,
Chinese Hare, Wild boar,
Bamboo rat, Brown bear, etc.

Yellow monkeys, Ringtail raccoons, Ring-tailed
lemur, Ring-necked pheasants, Rat snakes, South
China tigers, Masked foxes, Tiger frogs, Red
foxes, Red-beaked blue magpies, Red-faced
monkey, Orangutan, Red-cheeked bamboo rat,
Black bear, Chimpanzee, Black swan, domestic
chicken, Beauty rat snake, spider monkey, Black
eyebrow monkey, Black monkey, Black panther,
Black spotted frog, Black and white colobus
monkey, Black and whitetegu, Brown winged
crow cuckoo, Hippopotamus, River muntjac,
Porcupine, nutria, Gecko, Civet, badger, Gansu
zokor, Crested eagle, Yellow baboon, Scarlet
parrot, African elephant, Auricle fox, Crocodile
lizard, Sheep, East African baboon, Siberian tiger,
Panda, Asian elephant, King snake, Giant
anteater, Great ewe, Great egret, Pangolin, River
horse, Skunk, Red kangaroo, Red lemur, Redbellied lemur, Pond heron, Toad, Striped Water
Snake, Tibetan macaque, De Brazza's monkey,
Fruit bat, Leopard cat, Leopard, Zebra, White
rhino, White-headed langur, White fallow deer,
Lion, Hoolock gibbon, White eyebrow monkey,
Dezhou donkey, White-faced monk monkey,
White peacock, Northern white-cheeked gibbon,
Tiger, White fox, White bellied langur, Kangaroo,
White nose monkey, Yunnan horse, Pony,
Hamadryas baboons, etc.

3643

27 000

Negative

Negative

(3) Retrospective test results of animal coronaviruses
Retrospective SARS-CoV-2 NAT was performed on 6811 animal samples collected from Beijing,
Shanghai, Jiangxi and Xinjiang from 2015 to 2019, involving species of primates, Carnivora,
Artiodactyla, Anciformes and Marabiformes. The results were all negative.
As part of national active surveillance plan of important animal diseases, animal samples were collected
every year and these stored samples were retrospectively tested for SARS-CoV-2 after the outbreak of
SARS-CoV-2. In December 2019, 2328 samples of 69 animal species, including macaque monkeys,
forest musk deer, tigers, camels, bamboo rats, porcupines, goats and guinea pigs, were collected from
tourist areas, zoos and artificial breeding sites in Hubei Province. All were SARS-CoV-2 NAT negative
(Table 10).
Table 10. Survey of SARS-CoV-2 in wildlife before the epidemic
Nucleic acid testing
Hubei Province

Nationwide

Number of
species

69

14

Specific types of
animals

South China tiger, Raccoon, Siberian tiger,
African lion, Stump-tailed macaque, Civet,
Red fox, Meerkat, Porpoise, Skunk, Brown

Angora
ferret,
Snub-nosed
monkey, Sika deer, Wild boar, Elk,
Mallard, Bar-headed goose, Heron,

105

Total sample size
Test results

bear, Red kangaroo, Red squirrel, Marmot,
Porcupine, Fennec fox, Nutria, China
rabbit, squirrel, Guinea pig, Bamboo rat,
Muskrat, Sika deer, Bactrian camel, Grey
wolf, Hare, Mule, Chinese water deer,
Lynx, Racoon dog, Asian elephant, Black
bear, Leopard, Ring-tailed lemur, Tibetan
macaque, African baboon, Panda, Snubnosed monkey, DeZhou donkey, lion,
Pallas’s cat, kangaroo, Elk, Giraffe,
African
elephant,
Hippo,
White
rhinoceros, Zebra, Red panda, Francois's
leaf monkey, etc.
2328
Negative

Night heron, Chicken, Duck,
Pigeon, Fruit bat, Pangolin, etc.

6811
Negative

(4) Other information on SARSr-CoVs from unpublished studies reported during meetings of the
international joint team in Wuhan
• Tests on samples of more than 1000 bats from Hubei Province showed that none was positive
for viruses related to SARS-CoV-2 (see Annex F, Table 4).

Study on cold-chain products20
(1) Description of frozen food vendor operations in the Huanan market
There were 390/678 cold-chain related vendors in the Huanan Market. From September to December
2019, no substantial changes were reported in the type or quantity of import and sales of cold-chain
products in the market. Information of upstream wholesalers of cold-chain products from 256 stores in
the market was collected and analysed, including 10 vendors of domestic frozen farmed wild animals
and 26 wholesalers of imported cold-chain products. Through tracking and inquiry of these 26
wholesalers, partial information was obtained about 17 upstream wholesalers from nine provinces and
cities in China who imported cold-chain products into the Huanan market. Further trace-back showed
that in addition to China, there were altogether 20 imported cold-chain product source countries and
regions, and 29 kinds of imported cold-chain products. Information, including product name, import
custom, source province (domestic) or country (international) and product quantity, was collected.
Information about all imported cold-chain products in Wuhan from September to December 2019 was
also collected and reviewed, involving a total of 440 kinds of cold-chain products from 37 import source
countries or regions (Table 11). Information about the farms supplying the 10 vendors of farmed wild
animal products were also collected (Annex F, Table 3).

20

In this report, cold-chain products are defined as those supplied frozen or chilled to market. They do not
include live animals.

106

Table 11. Country of origin for cold-chain products imported into the Huanan market and
Wuhan from September to December 2019.
Group

Wholesaler site

Source country or region

Fuzhou, Fujian; Foshan, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Denmark, France, Iceland, Japan,
Fujian;
Upstream
Guangzhou, Guangdong; New Zealand, Norway, Russian
wholesalers Shenzhen,
Guangdong; Federation, Spain, Thailand, United
in the Huanan Zhanjiang,
Guangdong; Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
market
Fangchenggang, Guangxi; Ireland, United States of America,
Hebei;
Uruguay, Viet Nam
Dalian, Liaoning; Shanghai

Imported
cold-chain
products in
Wuhan

NA

Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Hong Kong SAR, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Faroe Islands,
Finland, France, Germany, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia,
Mauritius,
Mongolia,
Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, United
Kingdom of Great Britain, Northern
Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Viet Nam

Total

9

20+37

Number
of
different types
of goods

29

About 440

About 29+440

(2) Correlation between confirmed cases and cold-chain in Huanan market
The proportion of cases in stalls with cold-chain goods (5.6%) is significantly higher than those without
cold-chain goods (1.7%), and the relative risk of cases in stalls with cold-chain goods is 3.3 times higher
than those without cold-chain goods (relative risk = 3.3, 95% CI:1.2-8.6), and the morbidity rate of
vendors of cold-chain products is higher than others (3.3% compared with 1.4%), but there is no
statistically significant difference. Epidemiological analysis showed that the first three cases in Huanan
market all had a history of exposure to cold chain. (Annex E4, Table 6 and Fig 8).
(3) Type of goods dealt by environmental positive stalls
Analyses show that 60% (44/73) of the positive samples are related to 21 stalls, 19 of which were
located in the western part of the Huanan market, and the remaining two stalls were located in the
eastern part. 16 stalls were dealing with cold-chain product.
(4) Retrospective study on the cold chain in 2019
An inventory was made of imported cold-chain products in large and medium-sized cold warehouses
in Wuhan from September to December 2019. It has been confirmed that cold-chain products were still
in stock during the above period. From 4-6 February 2021, samples were collected and SARS-CoV-2
NAT were performed on a total of 1055 samples of imported cold-chain food products (no domestic107

origin cold chain products could be located at that time) including 330 pieces with outer packages, 244
pieces with inner packages and 481 food samples. The results of SARS-CoV-2 NAT were all negative.
(5) The persistence of live SARS-CoV-2 in environments related to the cold-chain
It was noted that in one study, the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 on cold-chain products did not decline
after 21 days at 4 °C (refrigerated food) or at -20 °C (frozen food). Even at 21-23 °C, SARS-CoV-2 on
cardboard surface remained infective up to 24 hours.(37, 38)
(6) Examples of introduction of COVID-19 into China through imported cold chain products
After China successfully controlled the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan in April 2020, a series of
clustered epidemics occurred in various places. According to the experience of prevention and control
of these epidemics, especially the successful traceability results of Xinfadi in June, Dalian in July and
Qingdao in October 2020, it is confirmed that SARS-CoV-2 can survive and maintain infection activity
in cold chain products and packaging for a long time, which provides a scientific basis for the possibility
of introduction of SARS-CoV-2 through cold chain products.

Conclusions
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

CoVs that are phylogenetically related to SARS-CoV-2 were identified in different animals from
different countries, including bats (Rhinolophus spp) and customs-seized trafficked Malayan
pangolins. Sampling and testing of >1,100 bats in Hubei Province, however, has been conducted
but none were positive for viruses close to SARS-CoV-2. Sampling of wildlife across China has
been conducted but no samples were positive for SARS-CoV-2.
The Huanan market had evidence of extensive sale of frozen products, fresh sea and aquatic
animals and products, livestock meat, and limited farmed wildlife products. All the product
samples retrieved during the outbreak investigation tested negative for the SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid.
SARS-CoV-2 can persist in conditions found in frozen food, packaging and cold-chain products.
Index cases in recent outbreaks in China have been linked to the imported cold chain. These
indicates a possibility of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through frozen products. The supply chains
to the markets in Wuhan included cold-chain products (including the seafood, aquatic products,
vegetables, animal products and farmed wildlife products) from several provinces in China and 20
other countries. Suppliers included countries and regions where SARS-CoV-2 (NAT and serum)
tested positive before the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, countries where cold chain imported products
were sourced, provinces where domestic wildlife farms were sourced, and where the relatives of
SARS-CoV-2 are found in bats and pangolins. There is evidence that some domesticated wildlife
species sold in the Huanan market are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-CoV, but none of the
animal products sampled in the market tested positive. Apart from frozen farmed wildlife products,
cold-chain products in Huanan market were not tested specifically in early 2020. These findings
do, however, raise the possibility for different potential pathways of introduction, stressing the
need for careful trace-back of these supply chains and sample testing.
Preliminary sampling and testing at other markets in Wuhan and upstream suppliers to the Huanan
market taken during 2020 did not reveal evidence of SARS-CoV-2 circulating in animals. Evidence
was not found of presence of SARS-CoV-2 among animal products in the Huanan market and
upstream suppliers.
Environmental sampling in the Huanan market demonstrated widespread contamination of
surfaces with SARS-CoV-2, compatible with the virus shedding from infected people in the market
at the end of December 2019. However, through extensive testing of animal products in the market,
no evidence of animal infections was found. One environmental sample collected on Jan 22, 2020
on a second market tested positive, implying an environmental contamination from the patients in
the communities.
Of 923 environmental samples in Huanan market 73 were positive; Forty-four of those positive
were from the stalls of 21 vendors dealing in the following products: aquatic animals and products
(n = 13), cold-chain products (n = 16), poultry meat (n = 6), seafood products (n = 6), livestock
108

meat (n = 5), vegetable products (n = 2) and farmed wildlife meat (n = 1). Sampling and testing of
38 515 livestock and poultry samples and 41 696 wild animal samples from 31 provinces in China
during 2018 to 2020 resulted in no positive SARS-CoV-2 antibody or nucleic acid tests. No
evidence was found of circulation of SARS-CoV-2 among domestic livestock, poultry and wild
animals before and after the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in China.

Recommendations
The joint international team made the following recommendations:
Recommendations for work related to the pathway of emergence from wildlife to people
Global-level recommendations
Although a large SARS-CoV-2 survey has been conducted in the animals in China, no positive samples
were found so far. Therefore, tracing the origin of the SARS-CoV-2 worldwide in relevant wildlife
species predicted to harbour diverse CoVs through international cooperation mechanisms should be
conducted for viral discovery of diverse beta-coronaviruses in emerging disease hotspots.
Specific recommendations
• Despite large surveys of wildlife in China for CoVs, there are limits to the power of detection
for wildlife populations over large geographic areas. Therefore, further surveys to identify
coronaviruses related to SARS-CoV-2 is needed in bats and pangolins in China as well as in
Southeast Asia (which is undersampled), and in Rhinlophus spp. bats in other countries where
this bat genus is found. This should focus in particular on regions where insufficient prior
sampling has been done and where analyses show spillover to people is most likely.
• Surveys of other wild animals known to be infected by SARSr-CoVs should be conducted
where they occur (e.g. civets, mustelids such as mink and ferrets, raccoon dogs).
Recommendations for work related to the pathway of emergence involving intermediate hosts
Specific recommendations
• Further trace-back at the wildlife farms that previously supplied Huanan market and other
Wuhan markets linked to positive cases, including interviews and serological testing of farmers
and their workers, vendors, delivery staff, cold-chain suppliers and other relevant people and
their close contacts.
• The surveys of livestock and farmed wildlife described in this report are large, but due to often
large geographic area and animal populations, there are limits to the power to detect positive
individuals. Therefore, surveys for SARSr-CoVs in farmed wildlife or livestock that have
potential to be infected, including species bred for food such as ferret-badgers and civets, and
those bred for fur such as mink and raccoon dogs in farms in China, in South-East Asia, and in
other regions.
• DNA barcoding of the meat product samples from Huanan market to identify more precisely
species involved and potential intermediate hosts or wildlife reservoirs of CoVs that might have
been involved in the food chain.
Recommendations for work related to the cold chain
High-level, global recommendation
• Conduct retrospective testing for SARS-CoV-2 from products manufactured in 2019 supplied
to the Huanan market and still available.
Specific recommendations
109

•
•

Analyse virus persistence and viability at different temperatures to simulate the freeze-thaw
cycle that would happen naturally as products are shipped from one port to another, then
through the supply chain.
Analyse the different role of the cold chain in the possible introduction of the virus in a market
and the possible spread within a market following the introduction of the virus in a market by
an infected human.

General high-level recommendations
• Establish a global expert group to support joint traceability research on the suspected origin of
the epidemic. For example, conduct related traceability research on countries and regions with
reported positive results in sewage, serum, human or animal tissues/swab and other SARSCoV-2 test by the end of 2019.
References
1.
Jones KE et al. Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 451, 990-993 (2008).
2.
Taylor LH, Latham SM, and Woolhouse MEJ. Risk factors for human disease emergence.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 356,
983-989 (2001).
3.
Smith I and Wang LF. Bats and their virome: an important source of emerging viruses capable
of infecting humans. Curr Opin Virol 3, 84-91 (2013).
4.
Halpin K et al. Pteropodid bats are confirmed as the reservoir hosts of henipaviruses: A
comprehensive experimental study of virus transmission. American Journal of Tropical
Hygiene and Medicine, 946-951 (2011).
5.
Latinne A et al. Origin and cross-species transmission of bat coronaviruses in China. Nat
Commun 11, 4235 (2020).
6.
Tao Y et al. Surveillance of Bat Coronaviruses in Kenya Identifies Relatives of Human
Coronaviruses NL63 and 229E and Their Recombination History. Journal of Virology 91
(2017).
7.
Watanabe S et al. Bat coronaviruses and experimental infection of bats, the Philippines. Emerg
Infect Dis 16 (2010).
8.
Woo PC, Lau SK, Huang Y, and Yuen KY. Coronavirus diversity, phylogeny and interspecies
jumping. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 234, 1117-1127 (2009).
9.
Wu Z et al. Decoding the RNA viromes in rodent lungs provides new insight into the origin
and evolutionary patterns of rodent-borne pathogens in Mainland Southeast Asia. Microbiome
9, 18 (2021).
10.
Anthony S et al. Further evidence for bats as the evolutionary source of Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus. MBio 8, e00373-00317 (2017).
11.
IPBES et al., Workshop Report on Biodiversity and Pandemics of the Intergovernmental
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services., IPBES: Bonn, Germany (2020).
12.
Wu T et al. Economic growth, urbanization, globalization, and the risks of emerging infectious
diseases in China: A review. Ambio 46, 18-29 (2017).
13.
Cui J, Li F, and Shi ZL. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol
17, 181-192 (2019).
14.
Corman VM et al. Evidence for an Ancestral Association of Human Coronavirus 229E with
Bats. Journal of Virology 89, 11858 (2015).
15.
Corman VM, Muth D, Niemeyer D, and Drosten C. Hosts and Sources of Endemic Human
Coronaviruses. Adv Virus Res 100, 163-188 (2018).
16.
Zhou P et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.
Nature 579, 270-273 (2020).
17.
Zhou H et al. A Novel Bat Coronavirus Closely Related to SARS-CoV-2 Contains Natural
Insertions at the S1/S2 Cleavage Site of the Spike Protein. Current Biology 30, 21962203.e2193 (2020).
18.
Murakami S et al. Detection and Characterization of Bat Sarbecovirus Phylogenetically Related
to SARS-CoV-2, Japan. Emerging Infectious Disease journal 26, 3025 (2020).
110

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Hul V et al. A novel SARS-CoV-2 related coronavirus in bats from Cambodia. bioRxiv,
2021.2001.2026.428212 (2021).
Wacharapluesadee S et al. Evidence for SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses circulating in bats
and pangolins in Southeast Asia. Nature Communications 12, 972 (2021).
Lam TT-Y et al. Identifying SARS-CoV-2 related coronaviruses in Malayan pangolins. Nature
(2020).
Memish Z et al. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus in bats, Saudi Arabia. Emerging
infectious Diseases 19 (2013).
Li W et al. Bats are natural reservoirs of SARS-like coronaviruses. Science 310, 676-679
(2005).
Azhar EI et al. Evidence for camel-to-human transmission of MERS coronavirus. N Engl J Med
370, 2499-2505 (2014).
Guan Y et al. Isolation and characterization of viruses related to the SARS coronavirus from
animals in Southern China. Science 302, 276-278 (2003).
OIE, Infection with SARS-CoV-2 in animals, OIE: Paris (2020).
Bai l et al. Controlling COVID-19 Transmission due to Contaminated Imported Frozen Food
and Food Packaging. China CDC Weekly 3, 30-33 (2021).
Pang X et al. Cold-chain food contamination as the possible origin of COVID-19 resurgence in
Beijing. National Science Review 7, 1861-1864 (2020).
Zhao X et al. Reemergent Cases of COVID-19 — Dalian City, Liaoning Province, China, July
22, 2020. China CDC Weekly 2, 658-660 (2020).
Yuan Q et al. A Nosocomial COVID-19 Outbreak Initiated by an Infected Dockworker at
Qingdao City Port — Shandong Province, China, October, 2020. China CDC Weekly 2, 838840 (2020).
Zhang Y et al. Genomic characterization of SARS-CoV-2 identified in a reemerging COVID19 outbreak in Beijing's Xinfadi market in 2020. Biosafety and Health 2, 202-205 (2020).
Xing Y et al. Rapid Response to an Outbreak in Qingdao, China. New England Journal of
Medicine 383, e129 (2020).
Liu P et al. Cold-chain transportation in the frozen food industry may have caused a recurrence
of COVID-19 cases in destination: Successful isolation of SARS-CoV-2 virus from the
imported frozen cod package surface. Biosafety and Health 2, 199-201 (2020).
Huang C et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
China. The Lancet (2020).
Deng J et al. Serological survey of SARS-CoV-2 for experimental, domestic, companion and
wild animals excludes intermediate hosts of 35 different species of animals. Transbound Emerg
Dis 67, 1745-1749 (2020).
Zhang Y-Z and Holmes EC. A genomic perspective on the origin and emergence of SARS-CoV2. Cell (2020).
Fisher D et al. Seeding of outbreaks of COVID-19 by contaminated fresh and frozen food.
bioRxiv, 2020.2008.2017.255166 (2020).
van Doremalen N et al. Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with
SARS-CoV-1. New England Journal of Medicine 382, 1564-1567 (2020).

POSSIBLE PATHWAYS OF EMERGENCE
The joint international team examined and discussed four main scenarios for introduction (see Fig. 1
and below):
 direct zoonotic transmission (also termed: spillover)
 introduction through an intermediate host followed by zoonotic transmission
 introduction through the cold/ food chain
 and introduction through a laboratory incident.
111

Fig. 1. Overall schema for possible pathways of emergence, providing a conceptual framework
for possible routes for SARS-CoV-2 emergence. The icons are meant to be interpreted in a generic
manner and the location and timing is not stated. The animals depicted reflect animal species that
have been discussed in relation to potential infection but can be replaced by other species as well.
Arrows indicate directions of possible transmission. The symbols indicating “evolution” are
meant to reflect any mutations, recombination, variant selection leading to enhanced ability to
infect other species and/or transmit.
For each of these possible pathways of emergence, the joint team conducted a qualitative risk
assessment considering the available scientific evidence and findings. The team assessed the relative
likelihood of these pathways using an arbitrary Likert opinion scale of “extremely unlikely”, through
“unlikely”, “possible”, “likely” to “very likely”(1) and suggested further international and national
phase 2 scientific studies as described in the recommendations. The diagrams are meant to be used as a
dynamic risk assessment framework and can be reviewed periodically when new information or studies
become available.
In summary, the joint team considered the following ranking of potential introduction pathways, from
very likely to extremely unlikely: (1) through an intermediate host; (2) direct zoonotic introduction; (3)
introduction through cold/ food chain; and (4) introduction resulting from a laboratory incident.
Building from the evidence for the studies conducted so far, follow-up research studies were proposed
for the first three options. The arguments considered and underpinning these choices are summarized
for each scenario in the section below.

Direct zoonotic transmission
Explanation of hypothesis
In this case, there is transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (or very closely-related progenitor virus) from an
animal reservoir host to human, followed by direct person-to-person transmission with (top row of
human icons) or without (bottom row) the need for adaptation of the virus to humans (Fig. 2). The speed
of dissemination will depend on chance events such as superspreading events (indicated by the icon for
the market, and for groups).
112

Fig. 2. Schema for direct zoonotic transmission. Arrows relevant for this scenario are indicated
in red.

Arguments in favour
The majority of emerging diseases originate from animal reservoirs and there is strong evidence that
most of the current human coronaviruses have originated from animals. Regarding plausible zoonotic
reservoir hosts: surveys of the bat virome conducted following the SARS epidemic in 2003 have found
SARSr-CoV in various bats, particularly Rhinolophus bats, and viruses with the high genetic similarity
to SARS-CoV-2 have been found in Rhinolophus bats sampled in China in 2013, Japan in 2013,
Thailand in 2020 and Cambodia in 2010. Recently, two distinct types of SARSr-CoV were detected in
Malayan pangolin (M. Javanica sampled in rescue centres in China for smuggled imported wildlife).
The RaTG13 and pangolin coronaviruses do bind to hACE2, although the fit is not optimal. Seeding of
SARS-CoV-2 in mink populations has shown that these animals are highly susceptible as well and the
current evidence available cannot rule out the possibility for minks as the primary source of SARSCoV-2. Antibodies to bat coronavirus proteins have been found in humans with close contact to bats.
Bats are a known reservoir for many zoonotic viruses (with high virus diversity globally); they have the
highest proportion of projected zoonotic viruses of any mammalian order.(2) In addition, bat ecology
favours virus circulation (large populations, birthing waves, and closely spaced communities).

Arguments against
Although the closest genetic relationship with SARS-CoV-2 was a bat virus, more detailed analysis
found evidence for several decades of evolutionary space between the viruses. Although many
betacoronavirus sequences have been found in a range of bats, isolation of viruses from them is rare,
and only a few of the identified full genomes have human ACE2 binding properties. Because several
contact residues between the bat and pangolin viruses and the hACE2 receptor are distinct from those
in SARS-CoV-2, the affinity is low, and the viruses are genetically still quite distinct from SARS –
CoV-2. In addition, the link with and focus on bats may be spurious as far less sampling has been done
of other animal species. Confirmation of this potential bias is the identification of SARSr-CoVs from
113

pangolin and from bats in Cambodia, Japan and Thailand, in studies that were completed since the start
of the pandemic. The findings of high susceptibility of mink also raise the potential for certain mustelids
as reservoir hosts. Also, contacts between humans and bats or pangolins are not likely to be as common
as contact between humans and livestock or farmed wildlife, and virus presence in host animal is likely
variable and seasonal, further decreasing the likelihood of an infectious contact. Despite consumption
of bat and other wild animal meat in some countries, there is no evidence for transmission of
coronaviruses from such encounters, and the trace-back investigation found no evidence for presence
of bats or pangolins (or their products) in the market. The range of known mammals permissive to
SARS-CoV-2 is expanding, suggesting alternative reservoir hosts are possible.

Assessment of likelihood
Based on the arguments listed, the zoonotic introduction scenario was listed as possible to likely.

What would be needed to increase knowledge?
To further investigate possible direct zoonotic introduction, detailed trace-back studies of the supply
chain of the Huanan market (and other markets in Wuhan) have provided some credible leads to be
followed. These leads can be followed to develop further surveys of potential reservoir hosts, including
genomic surveys and serosurveys of high-risk potential reservoir hosts and their human contacts. Given
the geographic range of the animal species in which closest relatives of SARS-CoV-2 have been found,
such surveys should be expanded to include other countries, guided by knowledge on ecology and
smuggling routes.

Introduction through intermediate host followed by zoonotic transmission
Explanation of hypothesis
SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted from an animal reservoir to an animal host, followed by subsequent spread
within that intermediate host (spillover host), and then transmission to humans. The passage through an
intermediate host can be without (group of animals, top) or with (group of animals, bottom row) virus
adaptation (Fig. 3).

114

Fig. 3. Schema for introduction of SARS-CoV-2 through an intermediate host followed by
transmission. Arrows relevant for this scenario are indicated in red.

Arguments in favour
Although the closest related viruses have been found in bats, the evolutionary distance between these
bat viruses and SARS-CoV-2 is estimated to be several decades, suggesting a missing link (either a
missing progenitor virus, or evolution of a progenitor virus in an intermediate host). Highly similar
viruses have also been found in pangolins, suggesting cross-species transmission from bats at least once,
but again with considerable genetic distance. Both these putative hosts are infrequently in contact with
humans, and an intermediary step involving an amplifying host has been observed for several other
emerging viruses (Henipaviruses, influenza viruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV). SARS-CoV-2
infection and intraspecies spread (including further transmission to humans) has been documented in
an increasing number of animal species, particularly mustelids and felids. SARS-CoV-2 adapts
relatively rapidly in susceptible animals (such as mink). The increasing number of animals shown to be
susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 includes animals that are farmed in sufficient densities to allow potential
for enzootic circulation. High-density farming is common in many places across the world and includes
many livestock species as well as farmed wildlife. There was a large network of domesticated wild
animal farms, supplying farmed wildlife. In high-density farms, there often are connections between
farms (for instance, through the workforce and food supply), leading to complex transmission pathways
that may be difficult to unravel, as was observed in other zoonotic outbreaks involving farmed animals.
Optimized conditions for sustained virus transmission chains in large-scale animal farms may also
impact on virus seasonality in favour of a year-round endemic transmission pattern, and thereby
increasing the zoonotic risk in winter months.

Arguments against
SARS-CoV-2 has been identified in an increasing number of animal species, but genetic and
epidemiological studies have suggested that these were infections introduced from humans, rather than
enzootic virus circulation. In addition, since the containment of SARS-CoV-2 in China, new outbreaks
115

have occurred for which genomic sequence data was generated. Based on epidemiological analysis and
genetic sequencing of viruses from new cases throughout 2020, there is no evidence of repeated
introduction of early SARS-CoV-2 strains of potential animal origins into humans in China.
There was no genetic or serological evidence for SARS-CoV-2 in a wide range of domestic and wild
animals tested to date. The screening of the major livestock species was done across the country and
provided no evidence for circulation of a related virus. The scale of testing in these species was such
that widespread circulation is extremely unlikely. Screening of farmed wildlife was limited but did not
provide conclusive evidence for the existence of circulation.

Assessment of likelihood
Based on the above arguments, the scenario including introduction through an intermediary host was
considered to be likely to very likely.

What would be needed to increase knowledge?
Given the literature on the role of farmed animals as intermediary hosts for emerging diseases, further
surveys including further geographic range are needed. Studies of the supply chain of the Huanan
market (and other markets in Wuhan) have not found any evidence for presence of infected animals,
but the analysis of supply chains has provided potential information that will inform a targeted design
of follow up studies. For instance, there was evidence for supply chains leading to wild-life farms from
provinces where the higher prevalence of SARSr-CoVs have been detected in bat surveys. While this
does not prove a link, it does provide a meaningful next step for surveys, as model for similar studies
in neighbouring regions. Meanwhile animal products from areas outside southeast Asia where more
distantly related SARSr-CoVs circulate should not be disregarded. Surveys should be designed using a
One health approach in larger areas and more countries, including genomic surveys and structured
serosurveys of high-risk potential reservoir hosts and their human contacts.

Introduction through the cold/food chain
Explanation of hypothesis
Food-chain transmission can reflect direct zoonotic transmission, or spillover through an intermediate
host. Meanwhile cold chain products may be a vehicle of transmission between humans. This would
also refer to food-contamination events in addition to introductions. The focus of this paragraph is on
cold/food chain products and their containers as potential route of introduction of SARS-CoV-2. Here,
it is important to distinguish between contamination of cold chain products leading to secondary
outbreaks in 2020 and the potential for cold chain acting as the entry pathway for the origin of the
pandemic in 2019.

116

Fig. 4. Schema for introduction of SARS-CoV-2 through the cold/food chain. Arrows relevant for
this scenario are indicated in red.

Arguments in favour
The arguments are similar as those listed for zoonotic introduction, but with an emphasis on the potential
for initial introduction through food animals or cold/ food chain products, or through contamination of
food and food containers (for instance by animal waste). This includes frozen food items that are
commonly sold and their packages in markets, including the Huanan market. Since the near-elimination
of SARS-CoV-2 in China, the country has experienced some outbreaks related to imported frozen
products in 2020. Screening programmes have found some limited evidence for the presence of SARSCoV-2 by nucleotide acid tests in different batches of unopened packages and containers in different
cities. In the epidemiological investigation of Qingdao outbreak, the live virus was isolated from the
outer package of imported frozen products. SARS-CoV-2 and related CoVs have been found to persist
in conditions (time/temperature/humidity) found during trade of frozen products suggesting the virus
could persist on contaminated frozen products.
Foodborne outbreaks with enteric viruses are common, and - when entering the food supply - may lead
to geographically dispersed outbreaks that can be difficult to detect. Seafood is known as a source of
foodborne outbreaks, and food as a vehicle of zoonotic infections, but most evidence is for
contamination of food with human viruses that are dispersed in growing areas through sewage or
contaminated water for irrigation. Sewage treatment typically does not remove all infectious viruses
prior to release of wastewater in the environment. These processes have been investigated widely for
non-enveloped viruses but far less for enveloped viruses in the food chain, but there is widespread
evidence for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid in sewage. There is some literature suggesting SARS-CoV-2
may have been circulating earlier as indicated by sewage testing in Spain and Italy.
Although typical foodborne infections are thought to be restricted to enteric pathogens, there is some
evidence that the oral route could lead to infection for SARS-CoV-2 from hamster infection
117

experiments, and the virus replicates in gut organoids. Many animal CoVs have dual respiratory and
enteric tropism. For SARS, food animal handlers had increased prevalence of SARS-CoV-specific
antibodies. Humans infected with SARS-CoV-2 shed virus through faeces and can have gastrointestinal
symptoms, suggesting involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. Humans can also be exposed to
contaminated fomites, as suggested from the studies on markets in China in 2020.

Arguments against
There is no conclusive evidence for foodborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the probability of a
cold-chain contamination with the virus from a reservoir is very low. While there is some evidence for
possible reintroduction of SARS-CoV-2 through handling of imported contaminated frozen products in
China since the initial pandemic wave, this would be extraordinary in 2019 where the virus was not
widely circulating. Industrial food production has high levels of hygiene criteria and is regularly
audited. Most viruses have been found in 2020 in low concentrations and are not amplified on coldchain products. It is not clear what the infection route would be (possibly oral, touch, or aerosol).
There is no evidence of infection in any of the animals tested following the Wuhan outbreak. Riskassessments have concluded that the risk of foodborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through these
known transmission pathways is very low in comparison with respiratory transmission.

Assessment of likelihood
The consensus was that given the level of evidence, the potential for SARS-CoV-2 introduction via
cold/ food chain products is considered possible.

What would be needed to increase knowledge?
In order to further study the potential for (frozen) food as a source of infection or the cold chain as an
introduction pathway of SARS-CoV-2, case-control studies of outbreaks in which the cold chain
product and food supply is positive would be useful to provide support for cold chain products and food
as a transmission route. There are some preliminary reports of SARS-CoV-2 positive testing in other
parts of the world before the end of 2019. There is also evidence of more distantly related SARSr-CoV
in bats outside Asia. Some producers located in these countries were supplying products to the markets.
If there are credible links to products from other countries or regions with evidence for circulation of
SARS-CoV-2 before the end of 2019, such pathways would also need to be followed up. Screening of
leftover frozen cold chain products sold in Huanan market from December 2019 if still available is
needed, particularly frozen animal products from farmed wildlife or linked to areas with evidence for
early circulation of SARS-CoV-2 from molecular data or other analyses.

Introduction through a laboratory incident
Explanation of hypothesis
SARS-CoV-2 is introduced through a laboratory incident, reflecting an accidental infection of staff
from laboratory activities involving the relevant viruses. We did not consider the hypothesis of
deliberate release or deliberate bioengineering of SARS-CoV-2 for release, the latter has been ruled out
by other scientists following analyses of the genome (3).

118

Fig. 5. Schema for introduction of SARS-CoV-2 through a laboratory incident. Arrows relevant
for this scenario are indicated in red.

Arguments in favour
Although rare, laboratory accidents do happen, and different laboratories around the world are working
with bat CoVs. When working in particular with virus cultures, but also with animal inoculations or
clinical samples, humans could become infected in laboratories with limited biosafety, poor laboratory
management practice, or following negligence. The closest known CoV RaTG13 strain (96.2%) to
SARS-CoV-2 detected in bat anal swabs have been sequenced at the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The
Wuhan CDC laboratory moved on 2 nd December 2019 to a new location near the Huanan market. Such
moves can be disruptive for the operations of any laboratory.

Arguments against
The closest relatives of SARS-CoV-2 from bats and pangolin are evolutionarily distant from SARSCoV-2. There has been speculation regarding the presence of human ACE2 receptor binding and a
furin-cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2, but both have been found in animal viruses as well, and elements
of the furin-cleavage site are present in RmYN02 and the new Thailand bat SARSr-CoV. There is no
record of viruses closely related to SARS-CoV-2 in any laboratory before December 2019, or genomes
that in combination could provide a SARS-CoV-2 genome. Regarding accidental culture, prior to
December 2019, there is no evidence of circulation of SARS-CoV-2 among people globally and the
surveillance programme in place was limited regarding the number of samples processed and therefore
the risk of accidental culturing SARS-CoV-2 in the laboratory is extremely low. The three laboratories
in Wuhan working with either CoVs diagnostics and/or CoVs isolation and vaccine development all
had high quality biosafety level (BSL3 or 4) facilities that were well-managed, with a staff health
monitoring programme with no reporting of COVID-19 compatible respiratory illness during the
weeks/months prior to December 2019, and no serological evidence of infection in workers through
SARS-CoV-2-specific serology-screening. The Wuhan CDC lab which moved on 2nd December 2019
reported no disruptions or incidents caused by the move. They also reported no storage nor laboratory
activities on CoVs or other bat viruses preceding the outbreak.
119

Assessment of likelihood
In view of the above, a laboratory origin of the pandemic was considered to be extremely unlikely.

What would be needed to increase knowledge?
Regular administrative and internal review of high-level biosafety laboratories worldwide. Follow-up
of new evidence supplied around possible laboratory leaks.
References
(1)
Likert R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology,
140:44–53.
(2)
Olival, K., Hosseini, P., Zambrana-Torrelio, C. et al. Host and viral traits predict zoonotic
spillover from mammals. Nature 546, 646–650 (2017)
(3)
Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin WI, Holmes EC, and Garry RF (2020). The proximal origin
of SARS-CoV-2. Nature Medicine 26:450-452

CONCLUDING REMARKS
The international team recognized the impact of the epidemic on Wuhan, from affected individuals and
communities to government officials, scientists and health workers. The team commended the
engagement of all the professionals who had spent long hours analysing very large quantities of data to
support its work. In conclusion, the team called for a continued scientific and collaborative approach to
be taken towards tracing the origins of COVID-19.

120

