Interim Guidance
PUBLIC HEALTH AND
SOCIAL MEASURES
FOR COVID-19
PREPAREDNESS AND
RESPONSE IN LOW
CAPACITY AND
HUMANITARIAN
SETTINGS
Version 1
Developed by ICRC, IFRC, IOM, NRC,
UNICEF, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR, WHO in
consultation with IASC members
May 2020

Interim Guidance

Public Health and Social Measures for COVID-19
Preparedness and Response Operations in Low Capacity
and Humanitarian Settings
__________________________________________________________________________________________
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has changed the lives of individuals, communities and societies across
the world. To date, the most important insight from the global response has been that to successfully slow transmission, it is
essential to diagnose, isolate and care for all cases of COVID-19, including those with mild disease. In order to stop cases
from becoming clusters and clusters to progress into vast and rapid transmission, speed, scale and equity must be the guiding
principles.
People affected by humanitarian crises and those living in low capacity settings are differently impacted by the COVID-19
outbreak. In these settings, critical measures for COVID-19 prevention and control that have been a feature of the response
in higher resource settings, such as physical distancing, movement restrictions and home confinement, hand washing with
water and soap, closure of schools and workplaces may be more difficult to implement and some of them potentially harmful
to the survival of many community members. In addition, capacities for testing, isolating and treating those who develop the
disease, tracing and quarantining contacts may be severely lacking locally owing to weaker health systems.
For the purpose of this guidance, these low capacity and humanitarian settings refer to settings characterized by some or all
of the following, regardless of the social, humanitarian, citizenship, migration and asylum status of its residents and where
these settings are located:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Overcrowding and inadequate dwellings or shelter/ insufficient settlement infrastructure
Lack of availability of clean water and sanitation
High dependence on informal economy and daily wages
Poor access to health care and basic services
Disrupted health system
Prevalent food insecurity and malnutrition
Armed conflict and violence
Weak institutions/ challenged governance and lack of emergency response capacities
Prevalence of highly marginalized and underserved communities

Notwithstanding, strong community ties, structures and systems present in most of these settings as well as the individual and
collective resilience of the community are the strengths that will determine the effective adaptation and implementation of
important public health and social measures aimed at preventing and controlling the COVID-19 outbreak. Each setting remains
unique, urban slums would be different from humanitarian camps, and therefore these measures could only be effective when
appropriately adapted to individual contexts.
Public health and social measures in these settings need to be balanced against other risks affecting their communities, such
as lack of income, access to basic services and social nets, and food insecurity. Whilst poorly implemented measures can
increase risks of COVID-19 transmission, inadequately adapted interventions can have adverse impacts on overall public
health as well as a range of far-reaching economic, social and political consequences (e.g. people dying of other diseases or
left jobless and destitute, increased gender-based violence – GBV, increased violence against children, social unrest, etc.).
As far as possible, public health and social measures need to be accompanied by efforts to mitigate social and economic
impact to maximise the effectiveness of COVID-19 transmission reduction, while minimising these wider consequences and
not negatively affecting other lifesaving assistance and development efforts. They also need to be pragmatic and leverage the
strengths of the local structures and systems, notably through social mobilization and strong community engagement.

1|P a g e

OBJECTIVES AND TARGET AUDIENCE
This Interim Guidance outlines how key public health and social measures needed to reduce the risk of COVID-19 spread
and the impact of the disease can be adapted for use in low capacity and humanitarian settings. The recommendations
outlined here need to be adjusted to the scale of transmission1, context and resources, in order to achieve the objective of
managing COVID-19, namely to reduce transmission and facilitate the detection and management of infected and
exposed individuals within the population. The Guidance is intended for humanitarian and development actors of all
operational levels working with communities, as well as local authorities involved in COVID-19 preparedness and response
operations in these settings, in support of national and local governments and plans. Additional considerations for support to
residents of urban informal settlements and slums are available in Annex 1.

ADAPTING COVID-19 PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE TO LOW CAPACITY AND
HUMANITARIAN SETTINGS
Recommended public health and social measures need to be adapted to context and resources in order to be effective. In low
capacity and humanitarian settings, the trajectory of the COVID-19 outbreak will also depend on the complex interplay of
demographics, socio-cultural strengths and disparities, the prevalence of other diseases, the density of the living conditions,
environmental and potentially other different factors associated with poor COVID-19 outcomes.
The recommendations for COVID-19 public health and social measures delineated in the sections below are those
recommended for all settings. For low capacity and humanitarian settings, practical adaptations need to be made considering
the context of each setting, but they also need to remain anchored to the public health principles underlying each measure
and commensurate to the risks identified. These principles along with approaches to adaptations and enablers for
implementation as well as key actions for these settings are laid out for each recommendation in the sections below.
Critical measures such as hand hygiene in the community and healthcare settings will require the maximum mobilization of
available and external resources and partners to ensure the availability of sufficient quantities of safe water and handwashing
supplies throughout the outbreak response; this investment needs to subsequently be maintained to contribute to longer term
benefits and prevention of future outbreaks. Although clinical management of severe and critical cases may require resources
and capacities exceeding those available, similar efforts should be made, including through a coordinated international
assistance; increasing clinical management capacities for COVID-19 will also contribute to longer term improvement of health
service delivery when properly sustained. The recommendations and adaptations below will be updated as new information
become available.

1

The scale of transmission of COVID-19 in countries, and within sub-national administrative areas, can be categorized as follow:
•
No reported cases;
•
Sporadic cases: one or more cases, imported or locally detected;
•
Clusters of cases: cases clustered in time, geographic location and/or by common exposure;
•
Community transmission: larger outbreaks of local transmission defined through an assessment of factors including, but not
limited to large numbers of cases not linkable to transmission chains, large number of cases from sentinel lab surveillance,
multiple unrelated clusters in several areas of the country/ territory/ area.

2|P a g e

3|P a g e

Assumptions
Given the lack of documented experience in dealing with COVID-19 in low capacity and humanitarian settings, this guidance
has been developed with the following assumptions:
• Due to the characteristics described above and based on experience with previous outbreaks of acute respiratory
diseases, it is possible that COVID-19, once introduced, will spread rapidly in low capacity and humanitarian settings due
to the high density of living and lack of water and sanitation in the community.
• The high prevalence of other diseases in these settings, including malnutrition, common childhood diseases, tuberculosis
and other respiratory and communicable diseases, potentially HIV as well as a range of other socio-demographic factors
and existing disparities may result in different proportions of severe and critical COVID-19 cases; it will be important to
closely monitor how the disease is manifested differently in these settings.
• The capacity of the health system to deliver essential services is likely to be inadequate prior to the epidemic (particularly
if degraded by armed conflict, broader economic constraints, limited capacity to respond to emergencies) and it will be
challenging to scale up rapidly, especially for the treatment of severe and critical cases; overstretching the already fragile
and disrupted system would result in higher avoidable mortality from morbidity other than COVID-19.
• Capacities for testing may be extremely weak, if not absent, and the ability to isolate cases, quarantine contacts and
manage cases in the community is most likely to be limited.
• Once available, it is possible that COVID-19 specific treatment and vaccines may take a longer time to become available
in these settings.
• Achieving reasonable control measures such as hygiene, physical distancing, and adherence to confinement, will likely
be difficult and some of the restrictive measures such as home confinement may directly result in more harmful negative
socio-economic and overall public health consequences compared to better resourced settings; state capacities
(financing, human resources, institutions) to mitigate COVID-19 risks and associated negative consequences are also
likely to be inadequate.
• In some of these settings there may be pockets inside the communities who are socially excluded because of their
gender, ethnicity, caste, religion, disability, migration status and other socio-cultural attributes, and in fragmented
societies, strong community ties may exist within sub-communities, but not across them; poorly adapted public health
and social measures may exacerbate these existing inequalities and conditions of vulnerability.

Human rights and protection considerations
The core principles of human rights include accountability, equality, non-discrimination and participation. These apply to all
people, including during public health and other emergencies. The use of emergency powers to respond to the COVID-19
pandemic must take account of these core principles, and must be proportional, be neither discriminatory nor arbitrary, and
be grounded in applicable legal frameworks.
In formulating and implementing COVID-19 prevention, mitigation and response measures, extra care should be taken to
assess their possible impact on the most vulnerable among populations to avoid disproportionate or discriminatory impacts,
even if unintended. It is important to recognize the extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak may affect people differently
according to their age, sexual orientation and gender identity, ethnicity, disability, education, employment, displacement,
migration status and other socio-cultural attributes. The risks of exacerbating existing inequities through the implementation
of COVID-19 prevention and control measures need to be carefully evaluated and mitigated.
Populations living in low capacity settings face enhanced vulnerabilities in the COVID-19 context. Persons who are homeless,
displaced, whether internally or as a refugee or an asylum-seeker, those who are stateless and migrants with tenuous legal
status face additional compounding risk factors which may dramatically increase the risks they face in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. It is essential to include these groups in all national mitigation and response measures, and to maintain
two-way communication with them to listen to their concerns and to incorporate these into adjustments to national approaches.
Women and girls
Women and girls are likely to experience distinct challenges and risks associated with the COVID-19 outbreak, exacerbating
already existing gender inequalities. Increased responsibility related to caregiving and within the household may limit women
and girls’ access to information and services. During an outbreak, where women have less power in decision making than
men, their needs may largely be unmet and life-saving resources for reproductive and sexual health may be diverted to the
emergency response. In addition, life-saving care and support to GBV survivors may be disrupted. Women and girls are also
at heightened risk of intimate partner and other forms of domestic violence as a result of increased food insecurity and
heightened tensions in the household. Negative economic impacts may increase the likelihood of survival sex, transactional
sex and risk of sexual exploitation and abuse in the community and within projects, all of which greatly enhance exposure to
the COVID-19 virus as well as sexually transmitted diseases.

4|P a g e

Children
Hundreds of millions of children are out of school and confined to their homes, which for many means confinement to cramped
living conditions. Confinement and additional restrictions increase risks of children being exposed to violence in the home and
limit their ability to seek help. In all decisions involving children, their best interests must be a primary consideration.
Maintenance of family unity is a key right of the child and must be prioritized. Family separation should be a last resort, for
the shortest possible time and reunification should be prioritized. States must recognize the right of parents and guardians to
make decisions about their children. Special consideration will be taken for those children already socially excluded and
affected by discrimination, such as those in street situations or in institutions or otherwise without parental/family care as they
will become even more vulnerable due to lockdowns and closure of social services, and they may face arbitrary arrests and
detention, where they are also vulnerable to sexual violence (abuse and exploitation).
Conflict and displacement
Armed conflict, violence and insecurity make responding to COVID-19 more difficult. If not adapted to context, heavy-handed
responses to COVID-19 in such settings may create more conflict and violence, and thus more vulnerable groups who need
to be factored into the response. On the pretext of public health, the potential for arbitrary arrest and detention as well as
“coercive isolation” is a particular risk. Law enforcement and other armed actors may have important roles to play in responding
to COVID-19 and should be engaged constructively and pragmatically.
Displacement resulting from armed conflict and violence may cause additional barriers to access to health. Displaced people
may be erroneously blamed, stigmatized and harassed for transmitting the disease. Interventions to address these barriers
and improve displacement-affected people’s access to health services must be an important consideration in national public
health strategies.
For undocumented migrants, anxieties of detention or other repercussions may lead to health-avoiding behaviours. For
refugee-hosting areas there are risks of potential exclusion, neglect, or de-prioritisation from national and local planning and
resourcing. Authorities may also attempt to forcedly close camps, which will need to be averted for both public health and
protection purposes. The closures of borders as containment measure will also have a profound effect on displaced people.
For people fleeing from armed conflict and seeking international protection, access to asylum must be preserved.
Protection of health care workers
The protection of health workers is critically important; violence against the health system would be extremely disruptive for
the effectiveness of the response to COVID-19. Health workers are not only a vital part of the response to COVID-19, but
often come from the same communities that are affected. Given the already insufficient health workforce in many low capacity
and humanitarian settings, losing health workers would result in reduced availability of essential health services and increased
mortality. Their protection, and that of ambulances, health facilities and patients, should be assured through the concerted
efforts of the authorities and communities, so that they are able to perform their duties in a safe and secure condition.
International Humanitarian Law also protects health workers in armed conflicts.
Detainees
Detainees are likely to be more vulnerable to COVID-19 than the general population because of the confined conditions in
which they – and staff – live for prolonged periods. Detainees may present pre-existing conditions and vulnerabilities
(tuberculosis, malnutrition, etc already identified with negative COVID-19 outcomes), yet penitentiary surveillance and health
systems are almost invariably less robust than national health systems. Moreover, experience shows that places of detention
may act as sources of infection, amplification, and transmission of infectious diseases within and beyond prisons. Contingency
planning is essential in ensuring an adequate health response and maintaining secure, safe and humane detention settings.

5|P a g e

A. MOBILIZE ALL SECTORS AND COMMUNITIES TO ENSURE “WHOLE OF SOCIETY”
OWNERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION
1. Conduct risk assessment specific to the setting
Key references: Rapid risk assessment of acute public health events; Considerations in adjusting public health and
social measures in the context of COVID-19; Interim guidance: risk assessment and management of exposure of health
care workers in the context of COVID-19
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
While the risk of rapid spread of COVID-19 in these settings is likely, all affected populations are not at the same risk for
both exposure and transmission. Site-specific risk assessment should be undertaken for each setting to determine the risk
to human health and socio-economic well-being by the COVID-19 outbreak. Support community-led risk assessment
building on local knowledge and ensuring local ownership of the data and aggregation into local government-led databases
and assessments if applicable. Rapid behaviour assessment will be needed to understand belief systems, perceptions,
concerns, power-dynamics and preferred communication channels. The risk assessment will determine response including
its urgency, magnitude, design and critical control measures where responders must prioritize resources depending on key
areas and high-risk populations.
Pay attention to the needs and existing community capacities. Despite their challenges, these settings may also be highly
organized, with well-established leadership structures. Understanding the complex relationships in these settings requires
a good knowledge of the communities’ socio-cultural diversity. Annex 1 provides more details on urban informal settings
and slums.
In the risk assessment, determine who in the community is most vulnerable based on demographics and co-morbidities
(including those with evidence or those suspected of increased likelihood of severe illness). Consider existing and emerging
protection risks for vulnerable or marginalized groups as a consequence not only of COVID-19 but also of public health or
social measures. These include increased risks of 1) harmful coping strategies such as child labour, 2) increases in GBV
and violence in the home, and 3) risks of family separation due to policies related to isolation, quarantine or hospitalization.
Moreover, to avoid migrants avoiding seeking health care due to their status, make access to healthcare independent of
migration status, eliminate all questions on migration status during the registration of all patients, establish a clear firewall
between health care services and immigration enforcement and communicate that policy widely.
Include a review of existing services, such as water, sanitation and hygiene availability (or not), food and essential supplies
necessary to address secondary socio-economic impacts. Assess the impact of the in-flow of resources during a crisis so
they do not exacerbate tensions between different groups.
Annex 2 provides an adoptable rapid risk assessment framework where the pathogen, exposure of the population and
contextual factors are taken into consideration. The framework has sample risk questions that will enable risk
characterization.
Key actions
Engage communities and local Civil Society Organizations (CSO) to assess the risks of COVID-19 introduction
and/or spread in their community to enable appropriate and contextualized response
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: assess risk of introduction and spread of COVID-19 outbreak for the whole community. National,
regional and global risks should be considered if communities are in border areas or with an influx of population from other
countries.
For sporadic cases: review risk assessment to determine the risk of sporadic cases spreading to clusters or community
transmission. Pay special attention to assessing the capacity to identify, test and isolate new cases, contact tracing.
For clusters of cases: rapidly identify risks that will stop transmission increasing from clusters to community transmission.
For community transmission: assess the risk of transmission increasing to catastrophic community transmission with
widespread severe cases and increasing deaths.

6|P a g e

2. Develop a COVID-19 emergency plan specific to the setting, based on identified risks and
capacities
Key reference: Operational planning guidelines to support country preparedness and response
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
An emergency plan for each setting needs to be developed derived from the national COVID-19 plan by the designated
authority and supported by partners; it should balance the potential benefits of strict outbreak control measures with the
socio-economic and protection consequences. See Annex 1 for more considerations for urban informal settlements and
slums.
Community engagement and empowerment are essential in ensuring an applicable and feasible emergency plan for each
setting. This plan needs to:
•

•
•
•

•

Set out different scenarios based on the risk assessment, consider the estimated number of cases at the peak of the
outbreak2 and the duration of the outbreak, and consequently the number, location and modalities of isolation and
treatment facilities needed and a referral system including the corresponding quantities of health personnel, and
essential items;
Set out role and responsibilities of key stakeholders, including outbreak response teams, community structures,
community level protection actors and social services, social protection and child welfare workforce, and partners
present
Establish a strategy for transmission prevention, early case detection, testing, isolation and treatment, the
communication and reporting channels, and a system for monitoring and adaptation
Include clear rapid actions for minimum infection prevention and control (IPC) requirements including IPC focal points,
training, infrastructures, surge capacity, processes and availability of essential IPC supplies to limit the spread of the
virus within the healthcare system and along food supply chains and trade flows; follow the WHO guidance on IPC
during health care when COVID-19 infection is suspected.
Designate and equip alternative care services, train providers to ensure continuation of services and access to
essential commodities.

Emergency plans must consider prevailing gender norms and cultural aspects in a given setting that could lead to unequal
access to services (i.e. separate spaces or modalities for isolation and treatment of men and women) and should also
include risk mitigation measures for GBV, violence against children, other forms of violence and discrimination. Where an
influx of displaced people or migrants, including unaccompanied and separated children (UASC) may be expected, plans
should include designating and training staff who are conducting initial registration and health screening to identify and refer
UASC to trained child welfare workers or members of community-based protection mechanisms who can act on a child’s
best interest.
Key actions
Empower the leadership of communities and local authorities3 in the development of this plan
Map resources that are available and mobilizable and identify remaining gaps for external support

3. Communicate risks clearly, regularly and honestly and adjust community engagement
approaches and measures according to feedback
Key references: COVID-19 technical guidance: risk communication and community engagement
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Working through people’s preferred and most used communication channels (e.g. community radio) and languages will be
key part of the response. Identify and work with local influencers in the community and local networks to play an active
participatory role across the response and enable them to effectively, accurately and consistently share trustworthy
information on risks, including what is still unknown, what is being done to find answers, what actions are being taken by
health authorities, and what actions at-risk people can do to prevent COVID-19 transmission in the community, avoid
contracting the disease and which actions to take if they think they may have the disease. This should be accompanied by

Sound methods for estimating attack rates are encouraged; in the absence of any estimation, a rate of 50% to 70% in this type of setting
is acceptable.
3 Beyond health authorities, including where relevant: penitentiary, law enforcement, military/ armed forces and mayoral authorities
2

7|P a g e

continuous messaging on importance of accessing essential health services, to avoid unintentionally signalling that people
should stay home and avoid health facilities. Key influencers include trusted people in the community, religious leaders,
teachers, role models, community volunteers, SCOs, women and adolescent groups, etc. Promote the use of digital
platforms and ensure availability of electric power supply in contexts where this is needed, and leverage those that could
particularly work on low-end (or free of data charge) devices when possible. See Annex 1 for more considerations for urban
informal settlements and slums.
To be able to engage the right groups, an audience analysis needs to be quickly undertaken. Understanding people’s
knowledge, behaviours, and perceptions becomes a key step in shaping not only messaging but also in understanding
enablers and barriers to the uptake of preventive behaviours and hence community engagement approaches.
Provide empowering behaviour-focused and forward-looking messages rather than messages that could instil fear,
confusion or suspicion. Communities must be fully engaged to prevent transmission and understand that measures required
to bring the outbreak under control will need to be supported by all even when they are disrupting the social and economic
life. Behaviour messages to communities should also encourage households to plan for situations in which caregivers may
become incapacitated or are otherwise unable to care for children by identifying alternative kinship or other family-based
care for children in the household.
Systematically monitor and respond to perceptions, rumours, questions, suggestions and feedback from communities
through trusted and culturally appropriate, available and accessible, remote or face-to-face channels, especially to address
fears, concerns, misinformation and stigmatization associated with people infected with COVID-19 and/ or responders;
subsequently, adapt response approaches based on these. Present this feedback to decision makers to make the required
course corrections to the response in time. Where possible and relevant, responses to important concerns raised by the
communities must be fed back to them– thus closing the consultative loop.
The risk communication strategy must include actions to address social stigma through capacity building and provision of
support to those who are facing it. Responsive, empathic, transparent and consistent messaging that is child friendly and
gender, age and disability-sensitive, in local languages through trusted and appropriate channels of communication is
required. Ensure messages are appropriate for and reach those who may not have access to usual channels including those
with disabilities, women and girls, those without access to digital channels and those who may be illiterate.
Key actions
Work with local influencers in the community and local networks to provide timely, accurate, user-friendly,
audience appropriate and trusted information responding to different people’s needs and focusing on what they
can do to halt the spread of the outbreak
Monitor and respond to perceptions, rumours, questions and feedback through trusted channels and adapt
response approaches
Address social stigma through capacity building and provision of support to those facing it

4.

Engage and train community health workforce to take part in preparedness, readiness and
response actions
Key references: Community-based health care, including outreach and campaigns, in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic; Home care for patients with COVID-19 resenting with mild symptoms and management of their contacts

Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
The community health workforce (including detainees in prisons) can carry out activities including risk communication and
community engagement, community surveillance, contact tracing, referral, promotion of IPC and hygiene practices in
different environments, home care (when needed) and support to people who are self-isolating. Community health workers
(CHWs) are crucial in the follow up of and support to those with mild illness cared for outside health facilities and the referral
to designated COVID-19 hospital if they develop any sings of worsening of illness. In addition, CHWs are key to ensure
continued delivery of essential health services, particularly in the context of restricted movement. CHWs will also be key in
ensuring risk communication, using community-based networks and key influencers and building capacity of local entities.
Leverage the existing community health workforce for an immediate response and quantify the need for additional workers
with skills among other community members to fill critical gaps in coverage and capacity, at regular intervals. Ensure that
tasks are allocated realistically, responsibilities are distributed equally and that work conditions are reasonable. Leverage
digital solutions, where available, to train and support the community health workforce, enable communications with the

8|P a g e

households in their catchments, and to reduce in person encounters and group gatherings. Care should be taken to
adequately resource, train, equip and supervise all CHWs. Link the community heath workforce with trained and engaged
community level social service and protection actors to help identify and address risks to vulnerable populations (including
single parent households, children, older people, homeless people, those affected by violence etc.) and support referral
pathways for multi-sectoral support.
Where the COVID-19 context necessitates workload modifications of the community health workforce and on the basis of
COVID-19 transmission dynamics and capacity of the health system to absorb shocks:
•
•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•
•

Conduct rapid assessments of community health workforce coverage and capacity; recruit a surge cohort if needed,
and encourage female health workforce participation
Clearly define roles for the community health workforce in the context of the COVID-19 response and involve them in
planning and decision-making
Ensure the community health workforce and other critical personnel (e.g. for supply chain) are classified as essential
and that they are exempted from mobility restrictions; through appropriate communication protect them and avoid their
stigmatization as “spreader” of disease
Recognise and remunerate the community health workforce with payments and non-performance-based incentives for
supporting the COVID-19 response; remuneration schemes need to be agreed upon prior to implementation, with clear
criteria for activation and deactivation
Ensure the safety and health of all CHWs and other essential workers through administrative, environmental and
engineering control measures (e.g. hand hygiene supplies, installation of physical barriers, use of natural ventilation,
environmental clearing practices), by providing the necessary trainings and ensuring the availability of IPC supplies
and personal protective equipment (PPE) appropriate to the tasks performed; protect workers against violence and
harassment, offer mental health and psychosocial support resources, and ensure treatment and care for those who
become infected
Modify supportive supervision modalities to minimise in person encounters while strengthening two-way referral links
with primary care facilities and ensure the community health workforce has sufficient phone credit to engage with
clients, access information, seek advice from supervisors, send data and receive payments using mobile phones where
available and ensure referral modalities are available
Ensure that the community health workforce is factored into supply chain quantification and coordination efforts with
partners and suppliers, including pre-positioned and buffer stock of supplies and medicines for providing essential
services at the community level
Incorporate data collected by the community health workforce into the health information management system; and
collect and monitor data on community health workforce COVID-19 infections and deaths, disaggregated by gender,
age and tasks performed
Leverage trusted community resources such as local authorities and leaders, community advocates and influencers,
and faith and religious leaders to promote helpful information, prevent and reduce fear, stigma and inequities, and
provide reassurance and solidarity to people in their communities
Identify low-risk community members who are willing to play key roles to support the sick and the most vulnerable
during outbreak response.

Key actions
Map community-based measures for which CHWs and community-based actors can play an important role in
implementation and oversight
Assign responsibilities, train and provide the necessary support to the community health workforce accordingly

5. Provide economic and social support to affected communities
Key reference: Shared responsibility, global solidarity: responding to the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19;
UNHCR case assistance and COVID-19: emerging field practices
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Establish a mechanism for households that have suspected or confirmed cases to meet their basic needs, either through
cash-based or in-kind assistance, e.g. through the provision of food, water, hygiene materials and other basic items for
cases and contacts throughout their stay in isolation and quarantine facilities (or, if these are unavailable, at home). Identify
safe ways to allow contact of isolated and quarantine individuals with family members, friends and legal representatives for
detainees (use of communication technology, set up of physical barriers between patients and visitors, etc.) and to also
access relevant information and communicate with service providers. Depending on context, explore arrangements of door-

9|P a g e

to-door deliveries for households living in confinement, either through community support or through local business
agents/distributors.
Plan for the continuation of daily essential activities in the community (trade, public services) and functioning community
governance structures and mechanisms that respects physical distancing and hand hygiene to the extent possible. Support
governments and their social protection systems, including with their routine cash transfer programs, ensuring the most
marginalized are not left behind as systems and programs adapt to the outbreak. Where social protection systems are weak,
set up emergency cash transfer by leveraging existing cash delivery systems and ensure there is no duplication among
partners.
The heavy reliance on the informal sector in these capacity and humanitarian settings will necessitate people to continue
working, including through sub-optimal conditions. Therefore, engagement with employers to encourage working
adaptations to reduce transmission risks and to protect livelihoods (including allowing paid leave and preventing unfair
dismissals) will be important. This may be supported through exploring the possibility of reducing attendance, scheduling
and channeling movements to avoid large crowds and peak periods, performing some of the duties from home. For
households that subsequently lose their sources of income or are forced to choose between earning an income and isolation,
explore options of inclusion into social protection schemes or safety nets (or, if necessary and appropriate, multipurpose
cash distributions).
Mobilize resources to provide shelter to those who are homeless or who live in inadequate dwellings, especially individuals
who are at higher risk of severe COVID-19 disease. Advocate for a moratorium on evictions for tenants during the period.
Furthermore, ensure that utilities (water, electricity, cooking and heating fuels, waste management) also continue to operate
through periods of lockdown, isolation, and quarantine.
Where possible, local markets and food systems should be supported throughout the implementation of containment
measures though access to agricultural inputs and facilities (agriculture, livestock, fishery, forestry), and humanitarian
assistance when needed. For vulnerable households, consider arrangements that protect their access to staples, exploring
the possibility of having access to land and carry out agricultural production.
Key actions
Provide socio-economic support (including cash-based and vouchers assistance) for COVID-19 affected families
to cover basic needs and access to essential services, and address inequities
Support local markets and food systems, including through humanitarian assistance
Engage employers to encourage working adaptations to reduce transmission risks and to protect livelihoods
(including preventing unfair dismissals)
Strengthen national social protection schemes through horizontal and or vertical expansion to address the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 and support the continuation of essential services and community functions
Ensure the homeless and most marginalized are not left behind as systems and programs adapt to the outbreak

6. Arrange safe burials
Key reference: IPC for the safe management of a dead body in the context of COVID-19
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Anticipate the numbers of burials when there is largely uncontrolled spread in the community and at the same time comply
to the extent possible with religious/traditional beliefs and practices. Prepare for adapted burial of the dead, with ceremonies
that do not compromise physical distancing. Communities should be supported to use community case definitions to
determine burial protocols in the absence of testing capacities in most low capacity and humanitarian settings. In places of
detention, authorities should conduct routine investigations into deaths in custody.
The risk of viral transmission while preparing the body of a person infected with COVID-19 is low and mainly through contact
with contaminated surfaces, therefore the systematic application of standard precautions is crucial to prevent transmission.
In scenarios of community burial, family members, traditional and religious leaders, healthcare workers and others who are
typically involved in preparing the body for burial should be supported with the information and IPC supplies and equipment
needed to reduce the risk of transmission. People at high risk of severe illness, such as the elderly and those with
comorbidities, should be discouraged from participating in preparing the body. They do not need to be excluded from the
service.

10 | P a g e

In close communication with communities, agree upon burial ceremonies that meet the need for IPC, and meet cultural,
social and religious needs. It is a common myth that persons who have died of a communicable disease should be cremated,
but this is not true. Cremation is a matter of cultural choice and available resources. In addition to adaptations to individual
burials, communities should be supported to prepare for the management of mass fatalities, including identifying systems
to alert the death of someone who may have COVID-19 requiring burial support; transportation, identification and storage
of unidentified bodies prior to burial; and expected burial sites. Mass graves, burial of unidentified bodies, and culturally
inappropriate cremation are usually unnecessary and should be avoided to the extent possible, as they have the potential
to cause long-lasting psychological, social and legal problems for families of the deceased.
Key actions
Adapt burial ceremonies to reduce transmission risks but meet local cultural, social and religious needs

B. PREVENT, SUPPRESS AND SLOW TRANSMISSION
7. Promote physical distancing, limit movement and minimize gatherings
Key reference: Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
According to current evidence, the COVID-19 virus is primarily transmitted between people through respiratory droplets and
close contact, including indirect contact with objects or surfaces in the immediate environment contaminated with respiratory
droplets from an infected person. Physical distancing is a critical measure for COVID-19 prevention (along with hand hygiene
described below). This is also important when humanitarian agencies are organising the distribution of food and non-food
items such as hygiene kits.
Engage communities, recognized leaders, social influencers, local authorities (including armed forces and law enforcement)
and partners to collectively identify the best methods to promote physical distancing. The simplest measure that can be
implemented by everyone is non-contact greetings and maintaining physical distance from other people. Gatherings,
including for religious purposes, should be minimized. In low capacity and humanitarian settings, confinement may not be
feasible; it can even be dangerous for the livelihoods of community members, many of whom work in the informal sector
and depend on daily work and/or income to live. In such situations, with the community, identify alternatives that maximise
physical distancing and hygiene measures, and minimize the risk of exposure and transmission associated with movement.
Discuss with communities the feasibility of organizing people’s essential movement inside their community. For example,
establish one-way flows to reduce congregations of people and maintain physical distance (e.g. a traffic control that will
allow people to move in a single direction to, from and inside markets, clinics, etc). Adapt flows within high-traffic and bottlenecked areas with higher risk for community contact (e.g. markings on ground). Consider limiting the number of people in a
given area at the same time and assign schedules per group of dwellings/ neighbourhood for the access to communal
facilities and shared spaces such as markets and places of worship. Ensure gender norms are taken into consideration
when planning these, including child care. See Annex 1 for more considerations for urban informal settlements and slums.
These methods will need to be adjusted to the scale and phase of the outbreak transmission but are never too early to be
planned for. Methods should be consistent with human rights, non-exploitive, proportional to the risks, and not contribute to
social tensions. Violent enforcement of this measure is not justified under any circumstances. Vulnerabilities of and risks to
women, children and people living with disabilities should be considered in designing and implementing such restrictions.
Key actions
Establish one-way system for pedestrian, ground markings and set up physical barriers in the communal facilities
to support physical distancing
Schedule different times for different groups to leave and return home where context allows
Identify alternatives to gatherings using locally accepted media

11 | P a g e

8. Promote hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette
Key references: Recommendations for Member States to improve hand hygiene practices to help prevent the
transmission of the COVID-19 virus; Water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management for the COVID-19 virus;
Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette are critical measures to prevent COVID-19 based on the mode of transmission. The
simplest actions that should be implemented by everyone and which require no additional resources are not to touch one’s
face (especially eyes, nose and mouth), and to cover the mouth and nose with flexed elbow when coughing and sneezing.
Regular hand washing should occur before preparing food, before and after eating, after using the toilet or changing a child’s
diaper, and after touching animals. Functioning handwashing facilities with water and soap should be available as close as
possible to toilets. Set up hand hygiene stations at the entrance of the community setting, at important structures,
transportation hubs (bus terminal, moto-taxi stand) and other strategic locations in the community (markets, public buildings,
places of worship, etc).
Mobilize resources and partners to ensure access to sufficient quantities of safe water and soap. Improving water access
at scale may require support to formal and informal water service providers (including hardware, consumables, and human
resources) to ensure water supply, rapid installation of water points, and set up of portable hand hygiene facilities, including
to “critical facilities” (such as prisons or migration centres). In contexts in which water access cannot be provided, hand
sanitizers’ provision should be ensured.
In support of water service providers, ensure sustained access to chemical consumables for water treatment as well as
spare parts and adequate resources to carry-out maintenance and repairs necessary to allow for the operational continuity
in service delivery. Ensure that cleaning agents are handled responsibly when being used, while in storage, and during
disposal. In support of critical facilities, enable them to carry-out large-scale environmental cleaning and disinfection. Facility
staff may require guidance on basic disinfection and require supplies (e.g. cleaning agents) to carry out this task on all
exposed surfaces on a regular daily basis.
Key actions
Make every effort, mobilise resources and partners to make sure safe water is available adequately. When water
cannot be provided, hand sanitizers’ provision should be ensured
Ensure sufficient hand hygiene stations exist, are supplied and functioning at all gathering places (markets, health
care facilities, places of worship, public facilities) and in households

9. Provide medical masks to health care workers, sick people and their caregivers – other
individuals may opt to use masks (including non-medical mask) if their setting and risks
require it
Key reference: Advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID-19; WHO guidance on the rational use of PPE for
COVID-19
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Although using masks is the most visible control measure, it should not be relied on as a primary prevention strategy.
Medical masks must be prioritized for HCWs, sick individuals in the community and their caretakers, and respirators (N95,
FFP2, FFP3) be reserved for HCW. For HCWs, additional PPE need to be used according to the WHO guidance on the
rational use of PPE. In situations where social service and community workers have face-to-face interaction with sick
individuals or their direct contacts, they should also be provided with medical masks and other protective gear as locally
mandated and according to the same guidance.
For other individuals such as healthy people in the community, national and local authorities may opt for the usage of masks
based on the risks of exposure to the COVID-19 virus and the type of setting such as low capacity and humanitarian settings.
There are potential advantages of the use of masks, which include reducing potential exposure risk from an infected person
during the ‘pre-symptomatic’ period or if an infected person is asymptomatic and avoid stigmatization of individuals wearing
masks for source control (those who are already infected). However, there are also potential risks with the widespread use
of mask, including increased potential for a person to become infected with COVID-19 if the mask is contaminated by dirty
hands and/ or the mask is not discarded or cleaned properly if reusable (e.g. due to lack of water) after use. Wearing a
mask can also give a false sense of security, with neglect of other essential measures, such as hand hygiene practices and

12 | P a g e

physical distancing. It is critical to emphasize that a mask alone is not a sufficient measure to prevent infection, and it should
only be considered when proper cleaning is possible and correct measures are taken to put it on and take it off. Any decision
on the use of masks should include measures such as hand hygiene before and after wearing masks, cleaning and
disinfection of the environment, proper handling of used masks, etc.
Current WHO guidance provides consideration on masks to be worn by healthy individuals in the community if the national
government makes the decision to implement it. For non-medical masks (also known as cloth masks), the type of fabric
used, number of layers, combination of material used, mask shape and maintenance of mask are important considerations
to ensure increased effectiveness. Non-medical (Cloth masks) are not considered PPE and as such it is not recommended
for health care workers. As for other PPE items, if production of masks for use in health care settings is proposed locally in
situations of shortage or stock out, a local authority should assess the proposed PPE according to specific minimum
standards and technical specifications.
Key actions
Medical masks are reserved for HCWs, sick people, their caretakers and other workers who may be exposed to
COVID-19 cases, e.g. in prisons and long-term care facilities
Temporary measures may be opted in situations of shortage of PPEs: extended use, reprocessing or use of
alternative PPE (table 2 of WHO guidance)
Decisions for mask usage by healthy individuals need to be based on a risk evaluation and supported by resources
to make them sufficiently available for safe usage – mask usage cannot replace other critical measures: physical
distancing and hygiene

10. Strengthen prevention measures for individuals at risk of complications and poor outcomes
Key references: Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19; Advice on
the use of masks in the context of COVID-19; WHO guidance on IPC for long-term care facilities in the context of
COVID-19

Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Bear in mind that there may be additional risk factors in low capacity and humanitarian settings that are not well documented.
For individuals with known risk factors for complications (e.g. advanced age, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular
diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, immunosuppression), it is particularly important to ensure critical measures (physical
distancing and hygiene) are implemented, and that they may be detected when they fall ill and cared for as early possible.
Complementary measures, such as the wearing of mask, may be considered in addition to these measures.
Efforts to strengthen COVID-19 prevention for at risk individuals should be implemented at the household level, with the
support of the family. If a separate room is not available, physical distancing can be supported by adding a physical barrier
within the house for example. Environmental cleaning, especially the cleaning of frequently touched surfaces in the house,
needs to be emphasised. These same measures need to be extended to other individuals at risk as the knowledge on other
risk factors become available. For households in which high risk individuals are children’s primary caregivers, alternative
care arrangements must be made, preferably through kinship care identified by the family or other family-based care.
Existing collective accommodations for older people should be monitored closely for potential cases and staff working in
these accommodations need to fully comply with the required IPC measures. Additional placement of individuals at high
risk of poor outcomes in a separate facility or location should be avoided. The risk of introduction of the virus into such
facilities is most likely unmanageable, as shown by experience in high resource settings. This measure is also most likely
unsustainable in the long run given available resources, which should be prioritized for critical measures that are known to
be working.
Key actions
Identify mechanisms to support individuals at risk of complications to adhere to staying at home and maintaining
safe physical distancing
Identify and put in place additional prevention measures for individuals at risk of complications at the household
level supported by the family, such as physical barrier if a separate room is not available, the proper wearing of
mask, environmental cleaning, etc

13 | P a g e

C. FIND, TEST, ISOLATE AND TREAT THOSE WHO ARE SICK, IDENTIFY AND
QUARANTINE CONTACTS
11. Establish a detection, reporting and referral system for suspect cases
Key references: COVID-19 technical guidance: surveillance and case definitions
Public health principles, approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
With the leadership of the community and local authorities (including armed forces and law enforcement), establish local
mechanisms to detect and report individuals who could have COVID-19 to the designated health authority as early as
possible. Low capacity and humanitarian settings with established early warning, alert and response systems (EWAR) can
receive suspected COVID-19 alerts from both the primary health care centers using the standard WHO COVID-19 case
definition (Annex 3) or a nationally adopted case definition, from the community using community-based surveillance (CBS)
with an adjusted case definition and more informally based on rumors of illness in the community. In conflict settings
surveillance systems may be disrupted or in control of different powers; tailored solutions for combined reporting and may
be required.
Significant number of people infected with COVID-19 will seek healthcare for their illness, making health care facilities very
important in case detection. Clinicians should suspect COVID-19 based on standard case definition and should report
suspected cases via existing surveillance or early warning systems. COVID-19 case definitions should be shared with all
reporting primary healthcare centers and clinicians, and displayed at each consultation room as feasible. It is also important
to continue to monitor any significant increase in acute respiratory infections which may indicate undetected community
transmission of COVID-19 that may require further investigation.
CBS allows trained volunteers to report possible COVID-19 while doing other health promotion or risk communication
activities. Adapt community case definition from the WHO COVID-19 suspected case definition. Train CHWs to report back
to supervisors and health authorities for further investigation and follow-up. Persons meeting the community case definition
should be reported within 24 hours of identification. In low capacity and humanitarian settings, CBS can act as the link
between the community and health facilities, filling existing gaps in the surveillance system, allowing for earlier detection
and earlier action to limit transmission within the community. Surveillance through CBS can and should be paired with
COVID-19 related health promotion activities, including maintaining physical distancing, key messaging on hand hygiene
and respiratory etiquette.
Mechanisms should be available for community members to report rumours or events of public health importance via
hotlines and other means. Pay attention to rumours of clusters of cases or deaths due to/following fever and difficulty in
breathing, cases/deaths due to fever and difficulty in breathing following travel, rumour of having contact with a patient with
COVID-19 then developing fever, cough/ difficulty in breathing/or death. These may signal potential public health threats,
which may or may not be due to COVID-19. These rumours should be verified and followed up to determine the cause
rapidly, and care be provided to all who need it.
Systematic screening of individuals entering/leaving the community or attending public facilities, commercial buildings,
workplaces should also be implemented. Screening is also important for specific groups, such as displaced people and
migrants. Should health screening be implemented, do not depend on temperature measurement alone. Observe for visual
signs of respiratory illness and ask questions on history of fever and respiratory symptoms, and questions on history of
contact with a potential COVID-19 case. The same case definitions for COVID-19 cases and contacts should be used for
screening. PPE is not required for screening if a physical distance of at least 1 meter can be maintained. Otherwise,
screeners should wear a medical mask and eye protection to conduct screening. Health screening also serves as an
opportunity to provide information on prevention measures, important behaviour and habits to maintain. Incorporate
measures to prevent family separation and preserve family unity, as well as child safeguarding and protection measures
against sexual exploitation and abuse into the set-up and management of screening locations.
Screening patients before entry to a healthcare facility should be implemented. This is not merely for case detection but to
maintain safe health facilities for all patients. Suspected COVID-19 cases identified during screening should be managed
as per the COVID-19 response strategy for the setting, including triage, reporting, referral, treatment and isolation through
a safe dedicated pathway. All screened patients with respiratory symptoms, should be given medical face masks and
advised to practice good hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette.
Regardless of the reporting location, once an alert of a potential suspect case is raised, verification, investigation,
confirmation and reporting should occur as per national protocols. Referral systems should clearly delineate communication
with and transportation to the designated isolation and treatment facilities; this includes establishing payment arrangements

14 | P a g e

for transportation when needed. During transport, PPE and precautionary measures should be adjusted to the level of risk
to ensure safety of providers and patients.
Referral services should include protection of individuals, including children whose vulnerabilities may be exacerbated by
the virus or containment and treatment measures. This includes services for children whose caregivers may become
incapacitated or be otherwise unable to care for them as a result of the virus or containment measures. If a child is suspected
of having COVID-19, he/she should be accompanied by a parent/guardian/caregiver in PPE during the whole referral,
isolation and treatment period. In conflict areas, referrals may have to be done cross line and in coordination with a variety
of stakeholders and protection agencies. Safe corridors for the referral of COVID-19 cases may have to be negotiated
through CIVMIL actors and/or with parties to the conflict.
All surveillance activities must be done in a manner that is non-stigmatizing and doesn’t alienate people.
Key actions
Enhance early warning and case detection and reporting capacities in the health care facilities and the community
Implement health screening at community entry/ exit points and other strategic locations; health screeners should
wear a mask and eye protection when safe distance cannot be maintained
Establish a referral system and safe pathway for the suspected cases to the designated local isolation facilities, in
conflict situations through cross-line coordination
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: enhance early warning, alerts and response in all reporting sites and in the community; monitor
changes in reporting of respiratory illnesses and deaths
For sporadic and clusters of cases: conduct case investigation and line listing for all probable, confirmed, and suspected
COVID-19 cases, after establishing COVID-19 infection in the population. Suspected cases, in places where testing is not
available, should be considered probable. Enhance rapid alert notification pathways from health centres and communities
using text messages, voice call, hotlines in the absence of existing electronic systems. Surveillance should be enhanced in
areas with links to affected areas. Continue to monitor any significant increase in acute respiratory infections which may
indicate undetected community transmission of COVID-19.
For community transmission: if reporting and verification of all suspected cases and their contacts are impossible, at least
detection and verification of suspected cases with severe signs and symptoms or presented to health facilities should be
carried out; the community should continue to report cases and deaths in the community using early warning systems.

12. Test all suspect cases according to local testing strategy
Key reference: Laboratory testing strategy recommendations for COVID-19
Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Laboratory testing is required to ascertain confirmation of COVID-19 circulation in a population. WHO recommends that all
suspect cases be tested for COVID-19 according to WHO case definitions, however in areas with high incidence and/or lack
of diagnostic capacities, it is important to implement prioritized testing and measures that can reduce spread. In this
situation, testing should be prioritized for suspect cases who are:
•
•
•
•
•

Individuals at risk of developing severe disease
Those who will require hospitalization and advanced care for COVID-19
Health workers (including emergency services and non-clinical staff) regardless of whether they are a contact of
a confirmed case (to protect health workers and reduce the risk of nosocomial transmission)
The first symptomatic individuals in a closed setting (e.g. schools, long term living facilities, prisons, hospitals)
Vulnerable populations

All suspect cases who cannot be tested for whatever reason must be treated as COVID-19 cases. When testing capacities
are extremely limited, following the confirmation of the presence of the virus through the testing of the first few cases in the
area, a syndromic case definition could be adopted, where the presence of signs and symptoms of COVID-19 would be
sufficient to guide the clinical management of a case. In such a situation, a diagnosis of exclusion needs to be done and
testing for all other aetiologies for which tests are more readily available should be performed. It is important to assess total

15 | P a g e

lab capacity to retain capacity to diagnose other pathogens with a higher clinical relevance of diagnoses and continue
increasing testing capacities.
Key actions
Develop prioritised laboratory testing strategy for the setting based on testing capacity
When testing capacities are limited, use a syndromic approach to guide clinical management, following the
confirmation of the presence of the virus in the area
Ensure other morbidities can be detected and treated especially those with more readily available tests
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: if laboratory capacity exists, all suspected cases should be tested. If not, perform laboratory tests
on patients with severe clinical presentation; in the absence of any suspected COVID-19, consider testing suspected
influenza cases and/or severe acute respiratory illness (SARI) with severe clinical signs and symptoms.
For sporadic and clusters of cases: if laboratory capacity exists, all suspected cases should be tested. If not, perform
laboratory tests on patients with severe clinical presentation. If capacity exists, all symptomatic contacts should be tested.
if not, as feasible, perform tests on health care contacts, vulnerable close contacts and any contact with severe clinical signs
and symptoms.
For community transmission: testing capacity may be severely overwhelmed in community transmission. Thus, testing
should be reserved for health care workers suspected of COVID-19 and suspected COVID-19 cases or contacts who have
or may develop severe disease.

13. Isolate and treat all mild and moderate cases with no risk factors in designated facilities

Key reference: IPC during health care when COVID-19 infection is suspected; Home care for patients with COVID-19
presenting with mild symptoms and management of their contacts; Operational considerations for case management
of COVID-19 in health facility and community

Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Identifying and isolating probable and confirmed cases as early as possible are the most important measures to control the
outbreak. With testing most likely not available, following the confirmation of the presence of COVID-19 cases in the area,
suspect cases who cannot be tested should be isolated and managed as COVID-19 cases, and all other potential aetiologies
diagnosed. Preservation of family unity, particularly for young children, should remain a key principle in all isolation efforts.
Where possible, children should be isolated together with a caregiver.
In most instances, there may not be sufficient space in health facilities to treat all cases, and these facilities also need to be
preserved for the treatment of non-COVID-19 cases, such as maternity wards. Identify in advance empty spaces, ideally
next to the local health facility, where a new (temporary) structure could be put in place for isolation and treatment, or
existing community facilities (i.e. community hall, sports hall, etc.) that can be repurposed for the isolation and treatment of
mild and low to moderate risk cases as well as the isolation and monitoring of contacts of cases. This needs to be done
hand in hand with ample communication to and engagement of the community to address concerns and potentials for
resistance. Subsequently, plan for human resources, materials, equipment needed for the operation of these isolation
facilities.
The hierarchy of isolation priority is as follow: all suspect and confirmed cases need to be isolated at a health care facility if
resources allow, or at designated community or additional temporary facility (or designated area in the detention facility) look for locally-adapted approach to support cases and their families during isolation to ensure their safety and wellbeing.
All efforts must be made to increase the capacity of these collective isolation facilities, including through external support.
Home care should only be done when these other options are not feasible, or because of protection considerations for
children and other vulnerable individuals; it should be done for a short period of time and only if the home/accommodation
conditions allow and while waiting for transfer to a designated facility. In such situation, refer to home-based care for selfisolation: stay in room, own utensils and linen, no contact with anyone else but caregiver who should wear a mask.
Individuals requiring isolation and treatment who do not have an adequate shelter should be prioritized for facility isolation.
If an individual develops symptoms that may correspond to progression of disease and complications, it is important to
organize the rapid referral of these cases from isolation facilities to hospital.

16 | P a g e

Modalities of isolation and treatment should be voluntary to minimize avoidance and consider greater protections or
alternative measures for those who are at highest risk of poor outcomes if infected, including older caregivers or individuals
with underlying health conditions.
Key actions
Use hierarchy of isolation priority to isolate and treat mild and moderate cases without risk factors
Mobilize resources and establish community structures and/ or construct additional (temporary) structures for
isolation of cases based on the levels of severity
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: identify community facilities that can be repurposed for the isolation and treatment of COVID-19
cases according to the level of severity, or available land where new/temporary structures can be set up, ideally next to a
health facility; recruit and train HCWs, plan for logistics and materials for the operations of these isolation facilities
For sporadic and clusters of cases: operationalize these isolation facilities as described above
For community transmission: when the number of COVID-19 cases exceed the capacity of isolation facilities, prioritize
the more severe cases in the facilities, and home care for milder cases until isolation space becomes available. In isolation
facilities, if there is not enough space for droplet isolation, screens should be placed between patients to limit potential
transmission.

14. Identify, monitor and quarantine contacts
Key references: Considerations for quarantine of individuals in the context of containment for COVID-19
Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Contact tracing should take place for all probable and confirmed cases. Suspected cases who cannot be tested should be
considered as probable cases, and their contacts traced accordingly.
Identify the contacts of each case and monitor their health status for the potential development of COVID-19 signs and
symptoms for 14 days since the last day of possible contact. Use the network of trained CHWs described above for this
purpose – the community will be a major contributor to ensure contact tracing and monitoring are done properly, and that
contacts follow the quarantine recommendations. Ideally, during this period, all contacts should be quarantined in a
dedicated facility4. Consider protection of family members left behind during the quarantine period.
If facility quarantine is not possible, contacts must self-quarantine at home. Each contact should be provided with clear
information about the contact tracing process, self-monitoring of symptoms and signs together with resources (soap, face
masks if become symptomatic, etc) adequate for the tracing period. Information not coupled with resources may only
enhance COVID-19 infection in the household and the community. If tracing of all contacts is not feasible, at least
identification of health care contacts, household and close contacts should take place. Consideration should be made to
supporting the nutrition and livelihood of quarantined contacts who are unable to provide for themselves and/or their
dependants because of quarantine.
Close contacts should self-quarantine at home, and if they must leave their homes then temperature checks must be done
every day for the duration of quarantine. Other contacts will need to continue to be monitored daily. High-risk contact (elderly,
with comorbidities) should be monitored vigilantly as their existing conditions may worsen in lieu of developing any
respiratory symptoms, or their clinical course may be more rapid than with other contacts who develop the disease.
Establish alternate accommodations for high-risk household members during the contact tracing period. Consider
transferring them to an alternative shelter/household for the tracing period following thorough assessment of the secondary
household for safety of transfer.
Where quarantine will affect caregiving arrangements, the best interests of the child or other dependant should be a primary
consideration. Preservation of family unity, particularly for young children, should remain a key principle and where possible,
children should be quarantined together with a caregiver. In all measures for quarantine, take necessary measures to
prevent family separation in collaboration with child protection actors and facilitate communication with family members.

Quarantine is only intended for contacts – those with clearly established exposure; history to areas with reported cases is not criteria for
quarantine.
4

17 | P a g e

Encourage use of technological solutions to conduct contact tracing, where and when feasible (SMS, WhatsApp, specific
software like GODATA). If non-touch thermometers are not available to check fever, actively enquire about signs and
symptoms. In the absence of testing, any contact who shows relevant symptoms and signs should be considered as a
probable COVID-19 case.
Key actions
Add strict daily monitoring of contacts, especially close contacts, when they cannot remain in quarantine
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: establish contact tracing mechanism, train and equip CHWs for the task
For sporadic and cluster of cases: systematically identify and list all contacts and trace them on a daily basis
For community transmission: if listing and tracing of all contacts are not possible, prioritize close contacts, household
members, vulnerable contacts and healthcare contacts. Pay special attention to the vulnerable contacts and reporting of
their clinical signs and symptoms.

D. REDUCE MORTALITY BY PROVIDING APPROPRIATE CLINICAL CARE
15. Treat all severe and critical cases and those at risk of developing severe disease in equipped
health facilities
Key references: COVID-19 technical guidance: patient management; IPC during health care when COVID-19 infection
is suspected

Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
All moderate cases with risk factors and all severe and critical cases must be treated at a health facility capable of managing
the level of care demanded. Based on current knowledge of the disease, the majority of people infected with COVID-19 will
develop mild and moderate (including pneumonia) disease for which isolation and treatment at a community facility can be
done. However, approximately 20-30% of cases will require clinical care at a hospital with respiratory support, and this
needs to be carefully planned in advance: which hospitals have the capacity to treat severe cases, should COVID-19
hospitals be designated, how many beds and how many hospitals are needed based on the estimated number of cases and
what biomedical equipment and staff are available and needed.
Efforts and partners should be mobilized to urgently strengthen oxygen supply systems, including through external support.
This should look at already available systems and how to surge (i.e. PSA plants), and introduction of new oxygen supply
systems (i.e. concentrators, liquid oxygen) according to absorptive capacity. Ensure all consumables and accessories are
available, including splitters and delivery services. Ensure pulse oximeters are available at all care points. Essential care
includes: pulse oximetry monitoring, treatment for co-infections such as bacterial pneumonia, malaria, diarrhoea,
malnutrition with appropriate use of antimalarials/ antibiotics and provision of oxygen therapy, when appropriate.
If capacity is lacking and additional beds are created, do this in a holistic way making sure not only the structural elements
such as beds, building, equipment are available but also trained human resources and PPEs proportional to the increase in
beds. Emergency medical teams can augment local health services capacities. Refer to WHO SARI Treatment Facility for
design principles to ensure all IPC circuits for patient and health worker movement are well defined.
Follow established protocols for clinical management. Ensure dynamic adaptations to the protocols following the evolution
of collective knowledge of COVID-19.
Key actions
Make every effort, mobile resources and partners to strengthen oxygen supply system
Isolation and treatment of mild/ moderate cases should be prioritized in community facilities and those with
moderate diseases and risk factors, severe and critical cases can be done in designated community facilities that
have appropriate clinical care capacity if hospital beds are insufficient
Sustain treatment of symptoms and co-infections

18 | P a g e

E. SUSTAIN ESSENTIAL HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
16. Maintain essential health and social services for all
Key references: COVID-19: operational guidance for maintaining essential health services during an outbreak;
Community-based health care, including outreach and campaigns, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic (hyperlink
to be added when guidance is published shortly)
Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
Protect non-COVID-19 health services and their patients by cohorting COVID-19 patients in separate wards and/or
(temporary) structures. Prioritise safe water, IPC, PPE, personal and environmental hygiene resources to staff working in
all health facilities and allocate such resources appropriately between COVID-19 and essential services.
When normal services become compromised by COVID-19 caseload and when reassignment of staff to dedicated COVID19 treatment wards or facilities is needed, service providers need to put in place measures to ensure maintenance of
essential health services for all. Current experience indicates that stringent public health and social measures combined
with fear of people becoming infected in a health facility reduce utilization of essential services to below 50%. Increased
health needs should be anticipated for when routine services are being restored, to address the backlog of patients and
increased needs resulting from the disrupted services and emergency conditions, including domestic violence and GBV.
The selection of essential health services versus services that can be suspended will be guided by the health system’s
baseline capacity and burden of disease, the socio-economic conditions of the communities and the COVID-19 transmission
context. High priority categories for continuity include preventing and treating communicable diseases (malaria, tuberculosis,
HIV, etc), averting maternal and child morbidity and mortality, preventing acute exacerbations of chronic conditions by
maintaining established treatment regimens, continuity of critical inpatient therapies, managing emergency conditions
requiring time-sensitive intervention, and auxiliary services as diagnostic imaging, laboratory and blood-banks. Routine
health promotion visits and elective encounters may be limited, and delivery of vaccinations, antenatal and postnatal care
will likely need to be adapted. Transmission of COVID-19 through breast milk and breastfeeding has not been detected to
date hence standard WHO recommendations regarding breastfeeding apply.
Optimize service delivery settings and platforms by leveraging existing mechanisms, including modification of platform of
delivery of care (e.g. through outreach activities), staggering and managing patient flows (including distancing in waiting
areas, hand hygiene for outpatients when they enter and leave the facility); adequate IPC and physical distancing of
distributors and beneficiaries of essential commodities (e.g. ARVs, TB medicines) and supplies (e.g. ITNs) during
community-based distribution should be ensured.
Chronic non-communicable diseases (NCD) treatment may likely be temporarily suspended if longer continuity of existing
treatment regimens can be ensured; people with chronic NCDs can avoid health care facilities unless they have acute
symptoms or other urgent needs. The role of primary care level facilities can be enhanced in absorbing much of the nonCOVID-19 cases where possible e.g. through redirecting acute management of NCDs from hospitals to PHC level.
Rapidly redistribute the health workforce capacity where available or consider the recruitment of volunteers, including by
reassignment and task sharing (for example assigning more responsibilities to supervised CHWs). Explore the rapid
recruitment of additional health workers. Along with capacity development measures to bolster IPC and risk communication,
consider incentives for staff working during the epidemic, as they are at higher risk. Incentives scales need to be collectively
agreed with communities and local authorities, with clear activation and deactivation plans.
Ensure risk communication to the community to reduce fear of coming to a health facility with symptoms other than
associated with COVID-19, to reduce delays in seeking care and to promote safe care seeking for morbidity for which
essential services are being maintained.
Assign a designated focal point for non-COVID-19 essential health services as a member of the COVID-19 emergency
team, to ensure appropriate prioritisation for the continuity of non-COVID-19 essential services, and balanced resource
allocation for it with the resources required for COVID-19 control.
Key actions
Identify high priority essential services according to context and burden of disease and map them to the resource
requirements
Ensure appropriate balance in allocation of PPE and IPC resources for staff between essential services and
dedicated COVID-19 services, and other care providers e.g. in detention and long-term care facilities

19 | P a g e

Identify context specific alternative platforms and approaches to service delivery
Reassignment of staff and task sharing, identify context specific mechanisms for incentives for staff
Apply hands-off outpatient consultation approach
Anticipate increased needs for essential services after their suspension and/or disruption, when COVID-19
becomes under control, and lockdown measures are being lifted
Considerations according to transmission scenarios
For no reported cases: this is an opportune time to plan, if not already done, for prioritisation of non-COVID-19 essential
services and put measures in place to ensure continuity of services when transmission increases, and services start being
compromised.
For sporadic and clusters of cases: disruption of essential services may be minimal and limited to affected geographical
areas and facilities in affected regions may still be able to redirect patients to unaffected nearby facilities for routine services.
For community transmission: the risk of disruption of non-COVID-19 essential services is greatest in this scenario. As
the demand for services and resources increases, alternative models of provision of services that are context friendly are
needed. Physical space may become a challenge and options such as use of community centres, mobile clinics etc for nonCOVID-19 essential services may be considered. Health workforce to support essential services may become limited,
options to explore surge capacity could include remunerated overtime; health workers from non-affected regions; licensed
retirees; medical trainees for appropriate supervised roles; workers from non-health sectors to support with supportive roles
e.g. transport, administration, maintenance etc.

17. Suspend user fees of essential services
Key reference: Health systems governance and financing & COVID-19
Public health principles and approaches to adaptations and enablers for implementation
When COVID-19 is declared a national emergency, advocate for the suspension of user fees for essential health and other
services by all providers for the duration of the crisis. Establish a system through front-loading budgets and pre-funding
public and private providers. When this is not feasible, consider reimbursement mechanisms to compensate for loss of
revenue.
Consider cash and voucher assistance targeted to health needs and indirect expenditures, to ensure people are still able to
access essential health services, if cost is a barrier, and that the risk-benefit of such assistance has been evaluated. When
households start losing income due to the lockdown measures, social cash transfers (multi-purpose cash) will also contribute
to reduced financial barriers to access health services.
Key actions
Establish a system through front-loading budgets and pre-funding public and private providers, contracting and
reimbursement mechanisms, equity funds or voucher systems
Consider cash and voucher assistance targeted to health needs and indirect expenditures
Negotiate with agencies implementing social cash transfers to include a proportion for health
Make access to health care independent of migration status

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This Interim Guidance was jointly developed by personnel of IASC member organizations and partners. In particular, we would
like to thank: Graham Alabaster (UN-HABITAT), Raya Alchukr (UNFPA), Benedetta Allegranzi (WHO), Ida M. Ameda
(UNICEF), Maya Arii (UNICEF), Maaike Arts (UNICEF), Joseph Ashmore (IOM), Ombretta Baggio (IFRC), April Baller (WHO),
Amrish Baidjoe (ICRC), Federica Battista (FAO), Viorica Berdaga (UNICEF), Anjana Bhushan (WHO), Christine Brown
(WHO), Gregory Bulit (UNICEF), Tatjana Buzeti (WHO), Maurizio Campailla (ICRC), Penelope Campbell (UNICEF), Simone
Carter (UNICEF), William Carter (NRC), Alessandro Cassini (WHO), Jorge Castilla Echenique (WHO), Anirban Chatterjee
(UNICEF), Kathleen Clark (IFRC), Anna Coates (WHO), Giorgio Cometto (WHO), Ana P Coutinho Rehse (WHO), Carla Daher

20 | P a g e

(UNICEF), Henia Dakkak (UNFPA), Fernando de Medina Rosales (NRC), Roger Dean (NRC), Filiep Decorte (UN-HABITAT),
Sandra Del Pino (WHO), Anne Detjean (UNICEF), Charles Deutscher (ICRC), Janet V. Diaz (WHO), Hannah S. Dini
(UNICEF), Gwendolen Eamer (IFRC), Jain Eijkenaar (UNICEF), Rene E. Ekpini (UNICEF), Zahra El Amine (WHO), Gabriele
Fontana (UNICEF), Gregory Garras (UNHCR), Thomas George (UNICEF), Tasha Gill (UNICEF), Suvajee Good (WHO),
Andre Griekspoor (WHO), Farah Husain (US-CDC), Aynur Kadihasanoglu (IFRC), Catherine Kane (WHO), Sarah Karmin
(UNICEF), Edward T. Kelley (WHO), Brigid Kennedy Pfister (UNICEF), Hyo Jeong Kim (WHO), Theadora Koller (WHO),
Christine Knudsen (UN-HABITAT), Fernanda Lessa (WHO), Rosamund Lewis (WHO), Ramona Ludolph (WHO), Ruth Mabry
(WHO), Sophie Maes (WHO), Allen Maina (UNHCR), Christopher Maher (WHO), Franck Mahoney (IFRC), Hani Mansourian
(UNICEF), Claire Mariani (UNICEF), Rosanne Marchesich (FAO), Adelheid Marschang (WHO), Madison Moon (WHO),
Naureen Naqvi (UNICEF), Carlos Navarro Colorado (UNICEF), Andre Peter Obat Mbala (IOM), Taiwo Oyelade (WHO), Maria
C. Padoveze Fonseca (WHO), Boris Pavlin (WHO), Jerome Pfaffmann-Zambruni (UNICEF), Catherine Poulton (UNICEF),
Daniela Raiman (UNHCR), Pryanka Relan (WHO), Sophie Reshamwalla (IFRC), Braeden Rogers (UNICEF), Anna Ronzoni
(WHO), Marc Rubin (UNICEF), Paul Rutter (UNICEF), Sohel Saikat (WHO), Gina Samaan (WHO), Cecilia Sanchez Bodaz
(UNICEF), Ela Serdaroglu (IFRC), Pramila Shrestha (WHO), Mirela Shuteriqi (ICVA), Princess Nothemba Simelela (WHO),
Alice Simniceanu (WHO), Wan S. Sophonpanich (IOM), David Stewart (UNICEF), Soumya Swaminathan (WHO), Aicha Taybi
(WHO), Antonio Torres (IOM), Nicole Valentine (WHO), Maria Van Kerkhove (WHO), Katelijn A.H. Vandemaele (WHO), Yaron
Waldman (UNICEF), Kolitha P. Wickramage (IOM), Niluka Wijekoon Kannangarage (WHO), Alice Wimmer (IOM), Isabel Yordi
(WHO), Teresa Zakaria (WHO), Zandile Zibwowa (WHO), Dominik Zenner (IOM).
For further correspondence on the guidance:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

FAO: Federica Battista (Federica.battista@fao.org)
ICRC : Charles Deutscher (cdeutscher@icrc.org)
IFRC: Gwendolen Eamer (gwen.eamer@ifrc.org)
IOM: Alice Wimmer (awimmer@iom.int)
NRC: William Carter (william.carter@nrc.no)
UN-HABITAT: Filiep Decorte (decorte@un.org)
UNICEF: Carlos Navarro Colorado (cnavarrocolorado@unicef.org)
UNFPA: Henia Dakkak (dakkak@unfpa.org)
UNHCR: Allen Maina (mainaa@unhcr.org)
WHO: Teresa Zakaria (zakariat@who.int)

21 | P a g e

Annex 1.
Special Considerations for COVID-19 Outbreak Readiness and Response to support those who reside
in Urban Informal Settlements and Slums
______________________________________________
The global crisis caused by COVID-19 pandemic is likely to have severe health and socio-economic impacts on urban
populations, particularly on the poorest of the poor, and those living in informal settlements and slums. Currently, around 56
per cent of the world’s population- 4.4 billion- lives in cities, with over a billion living in slums and informal settlements. There
are specific challenges and issues which arise due to exacerbating chronic vulnerabilities in these settings, which must be
seen together with the health and socio-economic impact of COVID-19. The potential scale and impact of COVID-19 in these
challenging environments, calls for urgency to enable us to be better prepared and ready to respond.
OBJECTIVES
It is of critical importance from a protection, gender and inclusion, human-rights and public health perspective, that people
living in urban informal settlements and slums are included in all COVID-19 outbreak preparedness, response and recovery
planning. This interim guidance is in alignment with the WHO COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan and
WHO Technical guidance for COVID-19, and mainly targets the wider humanitarian/development community working in
humanitarian situations. Those who are involved in the decision-making and implementation of multi-sectorial COVID-19
outbreak readiness and response activities, need to understand how to respond appropriately and effectively in the informal
settlements in urban settings. It is not intended to be comprehensive and cross-references are made to other relevant IASC
Guidance Notes and briefs.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS
This Guidance, drawing from a brief developed by Social Science in Humanitarian Action Platform [link], sets out key
considerations for protecting informal urban settlements from the spread and impacts of COVID-19. The guidance issued on
“Scaling-Up COVID-19 Outbreak Readiness and Response Operations in Humanitarian Situations, Including Camps and
Camp-Like Settings” [link] is also relevant but informal settlements need additional focus, as informal settlements have no
formal management through a designated entities, their residents have a very diverse profile and they tend to be outside the
scope of government responses due to their informal nature.
Main characteristics
Informal settlements and slums are unplanned. Many are overcrowded, both at the neighborhood and house level, with very
limited public space, and lack access (or have limited access) to basic services such as affordable water, sanitation and health
facilities. In informal settlements, housing and land tenure is often insecure with threats of eviction from landlords and from
the local governments, which often prevent any interventions to improve the collective conditions. There is a need to pay
particular attention to the needs of vulnerable groups identified, especially those in need of specific assistance and support in
this crisis, including both medical and social vulnerabilities [link].
Many of the broader recommendations to protect from COVID-19 (to frequently wash hands, self-isolate and physical
distancing) are almost impossible to implement. Lack of in-house access to water and sanitation services, coupled with
household level overcrowding, make strict self-isolation or lockdowns extremely difficult. Slums are concentrations of urban
poverty and consequently, slum dwellers have very limited capacity to manage socio-economic shocks. Staying home for the
urban poor is often not a feasible option, as they live day-to-day, both for their work and access to food. Access to education
is at the best of times, difficult for many young people in slums, is negatively impacted by the crisis.
The informality of these communities means they are not officially recognized by governments. Little data is available on their
size and socio-economic profile, with statistics at city-level masking the inequities. This exclusion often translates into
ignorance about the community, stigmatization, mutual distrust and exclusion of government-led responses. The reach of
formal governance structures is limited, and residents have great difficulty in having their voice heard. Informal governance
mechanisms are important, but they risk fragmentation and are often contested.
Aside from their apparent informality, many slums are highly organized, with well-established leadership structures. Informal
settlements and slums tend to have a wide variety of community-based organizations each with their own level of legitimacy
that often fill gaps in service provisions (ex. garbage collection, safety). These include women and youth groups, faith groups,
traditional community structures, etc. Traditional leadership structures sometimes overlap with criminal or other groups.
Understanding these complex relationships requires a good knowledge of their socio-cultural diversity, framed by their areas
of origin and ethnicity. Larger slums are not homogeneous but can have several smaller “villages” with different customs and
social behaviors.

22 | P a g e

Inhabitants of informal settlements and slums maintain strong links to their rural homes, sending revenue, and travelling
frequently for work and social reasons. They will also return when sick, or to return their deceased relatives to the family home.
This mobility often contributes greatly to the spreading of pandemics.
These challenges are further exacerbated for some inhabitants, due to their gender, age, disability, refugee or migrant status,
sexual orientation, faith and other intersectional identity factors. Displaced persons often find informal settlements and slums
the only affordable housing option when moving to urban areas. Special attention should be paid to youth and children,
particularly child headed households, which may already be particularly vulnerable. Evidence from previous pandemics (as
well as preliminary information from the COVID-19 outbreak) shows that several factors increase the risk of sexual and genderbased violence (SGBV) and harm to women, children and other vulnerable groups. In addition, many people who live in
informal settlements are not able to work from home and so this raises issues with youth and children who are left at home,
with lack of access to education and being vulnerable to violence.
The following are key special considerations for inclusion in national and local COVID-19 readiness and response operations:
Key principles for preparedness, response and recovery
1. Support community leaders to operationalize a preparedness and a response plan, mobilizing the assets and response
capacity of all community-based organizations
2. Adopt an area-based integrated multi-sectoral response, that recognizes the spatial characteristics as well as social and
cultural norms and power dynamics
3. Ensure that the new operational modalities in response to COVID-19 are relevant to and improve long term preparedness
and risk reduction efforts
4. Prioritize emergency interventions that can be sustained and consolidated in the recovery phase
Data and assessments
5. Invest early in profiling informal settlements and slums, both in terms of its population (chronic and acute vulnerabilities
– health, food security, income/expenditures, diverse socio-cultural profiles) and its spatial organization (ex. water,
sanitation and solid waste points, markets, transport hubs)
6. Map the different self-organized groups and community-based organizations, their current roles and interrelations and
their potential as assets in a humanitarian response
7. Support community-led data collection, building on local knowledge, ensuring ownership of the data collected and
aggregation into local government-led databases and assessments
8. Map and monitor the relations and movements within and between specific informal settlements and slums communities
and their areas of origin
Governance
9. Facilitate connections between formal and informal governance mechanisms (incl. local government – communities) to
give voice to the urban poor and ensure they can help shape interventions
10. Harmonize the specific assets of existing community-based organizations for a more effective response, while aiming to
strengthen inclusive representation
11. Assess the impact of the in-flow of resources during a crisis so they do not exacerbate tensions between different groups
Communication
12. Establish trust and ensure mutual understanding so people living in informal settlements fully understand the risks and
are able to mobilize their communities to take all possible measures, while overcoming distrust in public messaging and
to counter disinformation
13. Identify community leaders among different social groups and areas and leverage their influence to disseminate the right
messages and information
14. Ensure that communication methods and messaging is sensitive to the diverse socio-cultural backgrounds in a specific
settlement, translating material into the languages used, in multiple and accessible formats, including for people with
hearing, visual and intellectual impairments and people with low literacy
15. Ensure feedback mechanisms on the feasibility of imposed mitigation measures and assistance are in place
16. Prepare and share public communication to address and prevent stigma and discrimination that can prevent people from
seeking healthcare. Messaging about “high risk groups” should be sensitive to minimize negative impact on those groups
Access of basic and survival services in informal settlements
17. Work with local governments and service providers to rapidly scale-up affordable provision of safe water, sanitation and
solid waste management, ensuring sufficient coverage, in light of likely increases in demand. Water utilities should be
encouraged to extend service lines and to make water provision for free services, and work closely with informal service
providers
18. Position adequate handwashing stations in strategic locations (ex. near toilets, markets, transport hubs, information
centres, main entry and exit routes) and use them as main hubs for awareness raising around COVID-19

23 | P a g e

19. Devise strategies for food and water provision that consider that households may not have enough capacity for storage
for several days and find creative ways to facilitate physical distancing (ex. dispersed mini-markets, home deliveries)
20. Monitor food insecurity and access to and affordability of nutritious food carefully and promote mitigation measures (ex.
urban agriculture, replacement programmes for school feeding)
21. Focus on creative ways to provide children with alternatives to school and play, to mitigate school closures and restrictions
on movements in the absence of community or household level space, which disrupt children's routine while also placing
new stressors on caregivers. This should include early learning opportunities for the youngest, that may entail providing
parenting tips and ideas for engaging their children at home
Shelter and settlements
22. Analyse the spatial set-up of the settlement to provide guidance on movement control, improved coverage of basic service
provisions, alternative food distribution systems, etc.
23. Map spaces and buildings (ex. vacant buildings, hotels, schools, etc.) in or nearby informal settlements and slums that
can be used for isolation of the most vulnerable, triage of potential cases and limited quarantine while also taking into
consideration their current use
24. Provide low-cost options to facilitate isolation for low risk cases in single room dwellings considering options for
partitioning
Livelihoods and mobility
25. Promote and tailor social safety nets to the reality of the informal settlements and slums (incl. very limited savings or
capacity to save), ensuring access to health services, water and food, while being sensitive to internal inequalities as to
avoid disruptive tensions
26. Prioritize cash-based assistance to help cover rent, utilities, and other housing related needs.
27. Make provisions so that essential informal services such as food selling, provision of water, hygienic articles, care for
children, persons with disabilities, older persons, and those with illnesses, can be sustained in the safest possible way,
including during lock down
28. Map movements between urban informal settlements and slums and rural areas of origin and consider working with local
leaders and communities on both ends to implement control strategies, focusing also on transport hubs and points of
entry
Protection
29. Ensure protection remains central to the response and through multi-sectoral partnerships, the detection of protection
challenges and monitoring of protection needs to provide response to identified protection risks, with a focus also on
health workers, service providers, etc
30. Monitor increases in community and household level tensions and violence carefully and work with community-based
organizations and leaders to raise awareness and mitigate, paying attention to gender-based violence. Further guidance
on addressing gender equality and women empowerment can be adapted from the IASC Gender Alert
31. Ensure that isolation of family members does not deprive people of their social support systems and coping mechanisms
or exacerbate stigmatization, including the use of public health measures as a pretext to address the informal status of
the settlement of slum.
32. Monitor the risk of possible evictions, as families risk to fail on rental payments, as marginalized members of the
community, victims of the disease or health care providers risk to be stigmatized
33. Advocate for the suspension of all residential evictions for the duration of the health emergency since evictions can
greatly heighten the risks of community transmission and work with governments to set up monitoring and intervention
systems to avoid also informal evictions
34. Ensure any measures to quarantine or separate sick or vulnerable groups should be temporary, so they can return home
once the risk is gone. Such guarantees will be essential to build community trust in quarantine measures, reducing the
chances of resistance to these measures which could hinder protection and mitigation actions
35. Monitor the protection needs of pregnant women, gender-based violence survivors, indigenous people, refugees,
migrants, internally displaced persons, people with disabilities and older people
UN-Habitat COVID-19 Response [link]

24 | P a g e

Annex 2. Rapid risk assessment for humanitarian emergencies and displaced population
Risk assessment involves three factors: the hazard i.e. SARS CoV-2, exposure and context. Based on current evidence, the
hazard is assumed to be a constant. Thus, the difference in risk can be largely attributed to exposure and context elements.
Basic steps to conduct a rapid risk assessment:
1.
2.
3.

Finalize risk questions based on current situation/site.
Assign a risk level for each question (green, yellow, red see table 2). This will be subjective but determined via
consensus of key stakeholders.
Aggregate categories to obtain a composite score to determine overall risk level: minimal, minor, moderate, major,
severe (See figure 1). This can be for an area (example, by camp or zone) or for the overall population.

The risk assessment identifies risks that can be effectively mitigated. The risk assessment should be closely coupled with
mitigation actions and response plan. It should be reviewed or repeated whenever significant changes occur in transmission
or in each risk component (i.e. influx of new arrivals, mutation in virus, etc.).
Table 1 provides key questions to consider in order to determine exposure and context risk levels. They are based on basic
epidemiological data: who, what, where, when and how. These will need to be adapted and prioritized for each site as well as
for the level of the assessors (health care, non-health care etc.).

25 | P a g e

Table 1. Risk characterization process
Process

Operational and risk communication

Inform response groups via regular meetings, public with IEC materials, radio jingle s

etc

•

•
•

•
•
•

What are clinical
signs and
symptoms?
Who is most
vulnerable for
COVID-19? Age
group(s), sex or
occupational
group(s)?
How severe is the
disease?
Is the disease
preventable and
how? Is there a
vaccine?
What is the natural
outcome of the
disease?
Is there an effective
treatment available?
What can be said
about the rapidity of
spread of disease?

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Number of people
likely to be
susceptible?
New arrivals? From
where?
Potential for
transmission?
Number of people
already affected?
Number of clusters
of infection?
No. of HCWs
infected?
Number of people
dead/ CFR?
Number of immunecompromised
people? HIV/TB?
Malnutrition?
Elderly?
Concurrent, ongoing
outbreaks (cholera,
measles, etc.)?

Context assessment (per site, district, camp, etc.)

What is the national risk? How many confirmed cases/locations? Is there local transmission,
particularly, among the host community?
Is there an early warning alert and response (EWAR) surveillance system in place that can
trigger quick alert notification for COVID-19 for the affected population?
What is the population density? HH size?
Is the site near high traffic/travel area (major airport, highway, bus, border?
What is the health system capacity? Available beds, isolation tents, staff, supplies, etc.?
Is the area easily accessible? If there is a suspected case, how will it be verified/investigated?
Is there access to adequate handwashing facilities at the household level?
Are there cultural practices/traditions holidays/events which affect COVID-19 transmission?
Mass gatherings at funerals, weddings, etc.
Are their known barriers to early health seeking behavior?
Is there triage, referral, isolation procedures in place for suspected case?
Are relevant surveillance/health staff trained on the use of case definitions, case management,
isolation process?
Is there an Identified RRT who can quickly conduct investigation and response among the
population?
Is there access to reference laboratories for COVID-19 testing?
What is the transport and communication method between lab and health facility? Do you have
adequate specimen collection, packaging and transportation supplies, PPE?
Are there identified community members to support COVID-19 surveillance? Key informants,
community volunteers, CHW, leaders, teachers, etc. who will assist with case detection, contact
tracing and IEC?

Risk characterization

Risk mitigation action
Select risks for mitigation actions, implement, review implementation

26 | P a g e

Risk monitoring and review

•

Exposure assessment

Ongoing process of risk monitoring and review during the outbreak

Hazard
assessment/COVID-19

Table 2. Risk levels
Colour
Green
Yellow
Red

Risk
Low
Medium
High

Action
Managed according to standard surveillance response protocols
Needs improvement, strengthening, additional control measures required (e.g. enhanced surveillance, isolation facilities, contact tracing)
Immediate response required

Figure 1. Risk matrix with define boundaries to aid risk characterization process

27 | P a g e

Annex 3. COVID-19 case and contact definition

Case and contact definitions are based on the current available information and are regularly revised as new information
accumulates. Countries may need to adapt case definitions depending on their local epidemiological situation and other
factors. All countries are encouraged to publish definitions used online and in regular situation reports, and to document
periodic updates to definitions which may affect the interpretation of surveillance data.
Suspect case
A.

A patient with acute respiratory illness (fever and at least one sign/symptom of respiratory disease, e.g., cough,
shortness of breath), AND a history of travel to or residence in a location reporting community transmission of
COVID-19 disease during the 14 days prior to symptom onset;
OR
B. A patient with any acute respiratory illness AND having been in contact with a confirmed or probable COVID-19
case (see definition of contact) in the last 14 days prior to symptom onset;
OR
C. A patient with severe acute respiratory illness (fever and at least one sign/symptom of respiratory disease, e.g.,
cough, shortness of breath; AND requiring hospitalization) AND in the absence of an alternative diagnosis that fully
explains the clinical presentation.
Probable case
A.
B.

A suspect case for whom testing for the COVID-19 virus is inconclusive.
OR
A suspect case for whom testing could not be performed for any reason.

Confirmed case
A person with laboratory confirmation of COVID-19 infection, irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms.
Contact
A contact is a person who experienced any one of the following exposures during the 2 days before and the 14 days after the
onset of symptoms of a probable or confirmed case:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Face-to-face contact with a probable or confirmed case within 1 meter and for more than 15 minutes
Direct physical contact with a probable or confirmed case
Direct care for a patient with probable or confirmed COVID-19 disease without using proper personal protective
equipment OR
Other situations as indicated by local risk assessments.

Note: for confirmed asymptomatic cases, the period of contact is measured as the 2 days before through the 14 days after the
date on which the sample was taken which led to confirmation.
Community case definition – example to be adapted
1.
2.

Fever + dry cough + difficulty in breathing OR
Unusual cluster of illnesses or deaths in a community

28 | P a g e

