Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of
live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional
food markets
Interim guidance
12 April 2021
Executive summary

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
recognize the repeated emergence of zoonotic diseases and
the linkages of some of them along the value chain of the
wildlife trade.1

Traditional food marketsi, rather than supermarkets, are the
norm in many parts of the world. Such markets form part of
the social fabric of communities and are a main source of
affordable fresh foods for many low-income groups and an
important source of livelihoods for millions of urban and rural
dwellers worldwide.

It should be noted that zoonotic disease risks vary among
different animal species (e.g. terrestrial versus aquatic animal
species) and different farming and marketing systems.
Therefore, a risk assessment is required to determine
appropriate risk management strategies. Captured wild
mammals are likely to carry agents of zoonotic infections that
may go undetected and affect humans who are exposed to
them.26

Traditional food markets that are regulated by national or
local competent authorities and that operate to high standards
of hygiene and sanitation are safe for workers and customers.
Significant problems can arise when these markets allow the
sale and slaughter of live animals, especially wild animals,
which cannot be properly assessed for potential risks – in
areas open to the public. When wild animalsii are kept in cages
or pens, slaughtered and dressed in open market areas, these
areas become contaminated with body fluids, faeces and other
waste, increasing the risk of transmission of pathogens to
workers and customers and potentially resulting in spill over
of pathogens to other animals in the market. Such
environments provide the opportunity for animal viruses,
including coronaviruses, to amplify themselves and transmit
to new hosts, including humans.

WHO works closely with FAO, OIE, UNEP and other
international agencies to ensure that the global food system is
sustainable, safe and secure and that technical support is
available for the strengthening of national food control
systems. The purpose of this document is to provide guidance
for food safety and other relevant authorities to reduce the risk
of transmission of COVID-19 and other zoonoses in
traditional food markets. Although this document focuses on
the risk of disease emergence in traditional food markets
where live animals are sold for food, it is also relevant for
other utilizations of wild animals. All these uses of wild
animals require an approach that is characterized by
conservation of biodiversity, animal welfare and national and
international regulations regarding threatened and
endangered species.

Most emerging infectious diseases – such as Lassa fever,
Marburg haemorrhagic fever, Nipah viral infections and other
viral diseases – have wildlife origins. Within the coronavirus
family, zoonotic viruses were linked to the severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2003 and the
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), which was first
detected in 2012. The COVID-19 pandemic stems from the
introduction of the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, into
human populations. Although the specific mechanism of
SARS-CoV-2 emergence has not been definitively identified,
at some point or over time, interactions may have occurred
that allowed for cross- and perhaps multiple-species pathogen
transmission. The World Health Organization (WHO), the

To reduce the public health risks associated with the sale of
live wild animals for food in traditional food markets, WHO,
OIE and UNEP recommend several actions that national
governments should consider adopting urgently with the aim
of making traditional markets safer and recognizing their

ii

i

Means an animal that has a phenotype unaffected by
human selection and lives independent of direct human
supervision or control.
https://www.oie.int/index.php?id=169&L=0&htmfile=gloss
aire.htm#terme_animal

A traditional food market is the term used throughout this
document to include wet markets, informal markets and
farmers’ markets that sell foods of animal origin/non-animal
origin/dried goods and where live animals are sometimes
housed and slaughtered on site.
-1-

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
central role in providing food and livelihoods for large
populations.

the marketing and sale of captured live wild animals as food
in the absence of effective regulations and to control the
safety of all animals and animal products intended for human
consumption.

WHO, OIE and UNEP call on national competent
authorities to take the following actions:

Introduction

1. Suspend the trade in live caught wild animals of
mammalian species for food or breeding purposes and
close sections of food markets selling live caught wild
animals of mammalian speciesiii as an emergency measure
unless demonstrable effective regulations and adequate
risk assessment(a) are in place.
2. Strengthen the regulatory basis for improving standards
of hygiene and sanitation in traditional food markets to
reduce the risk of transmission of zoonotic diseases.
During the current pandemic, additional measures for
crowd control and physical distancing, hand washing and
sanitizing stations as well as education on respiratory
hygiene should be introduced in market settings to limit
the possibility of person-to-person transmission of disease.
3. Conduct risk assessments to provide the evidence base
for developing regulations to control the risks of
transmission of zoonotic microorganisms from farmed
wild animals and caught wild animals that are intended to
be placed on the market for human consumption.
Regulations should address the traceability of farmed wild
animals to ensure that they are distinguished from caught
wild animals and should include strict biosecurity
measures.
4. Ensure that food inspectors are adequately trained to
ensure that businesses comply with regulations to protect
consumers’ health and are held accountable. In addition,
competent authorities responsible for managing traditional
food markets should be adequately resourced, so that
regulations focused on food animal production, processing
and marketing are consistently enforced.
5. Strengthen animal health surveillance systems for
zoonotic pathogens to include both domestic and wild
animals. This will provide early warning for pathogen
emergence and provide the evidence base for the
development of controls to prevent risks to human health,
in association with public health surveillance systems.
6. Develop and implement food safety information
campaigns for market traders, stall holders, consumers and
the wide general public. These campaigns should
communicate the principles of food safety and the risks of
transmission of zoonotic pathogens at the human-animal
interface and the risks associated with the consumption
and trade of wildlife. The campaigns should also
disseminate information to all stakeholders about the
importance of biodiversity and the need for any use of
wildlife to be legal, sustainable, safe and responsible.

Public health risks
The COVID-19 pandemic is a public health emergency that
requires a coordinated, multisectoral response. There is no
evidence that the consumption of food is implicated in the
transmission of this disease. Similarly, there is no evidence
that the virus responsible for the current COVID-19 pandemic
is carried by domestic food-producing animals, such as
poultry, pigs, sheep or cattle.2,28 It is likely that the virus that
causes COVID-19 originated in wild animals, as it belongs to
a group of coronaviruses normally found in bats.3,4 One
hypothesis is that the virus was initially transmitted to
humans through an intermediary animal host that is, as yet,
unknown. Another possibility is that the virus was transmitted
directly from a host species of animal to humans.
Some of the earliest known cases of COVID-19 had a link to
a wholesale traditional food market in Wuhan City, People’s
Republic of China, and some did not. Many of the initial
COVID-19 patients were stall owners, market employees or
regular visitors to this market. Environmental samples taken
from the market in December 2019 tested positive for SARSCoV-2, further suggesting that the market in Wuhan City
might be the source of the outbreak and/or that it played a role
in the initial amplification of the outbreak. Determining
whether or not and which wildlife species contributed to an
initial animal-to-human transmission of the virus remains a
critical research question. The answer may help us prevent
the virus from reappearing once the current pandemic is under
control.
During the SARS epidemic in 2003,5 SARS-CoV-1–like
viruses were isolated from live wild animals sold in
traditional food markets in China 6. This suggested that
traditional food markets provided an environment conducive
for animal coronaviruses to amplify and transmit to new
hosts, including humans6. Evidence of infection with SARSCoV-1 was found in humans working a t a live animal market,
and several of the known initial cases were chefs or restaurant
workers handling wild captured animals prepared for
food,5,6,27 suggesting a link between the marketing and
preparation of wild animals and the transmission of SARSCoV-1.
While SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 belong to a group of
coronaviruses found in mammals, other viruses can transmit
through non-mammals in traditional markets. During the
human outbreak of avian influenza A (H5N1) in 1997,7 a visit
to a retail poultry stall or a market selling live poultry in the

WHO, OIE and UNEP are committed to assisting
governments to strengthen food safety regulations to prohibit

(a) Effective regulation is defined as risk based measures that achieve the risk reduction

iii

Discussion on wild animals in the present document
refers to animals of mammalian species excluding aquatic
ones.

intended to protect the health of consumers and workers and ensure food security

-2 -

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
week before onset of illness was significantly associated with
the risk of becoming infected.

resources for maintenance and improvements. These factors
can impede the coordinated approach that is essential for
improving hygiene standards and food safety in markets.

Avian influenza viruses are not transmissible through wellcooked foods, but they can be transmitted from infected
animals to humans during handling and slaughter in the
traditional market setting. It is therefore important to limit, as
far as possible, close contact between live animals,
slaughtering operations and humans in such markets.

Recommended measures
WHO, OIE and UNEP recommend several actions that
national governments should take urgently to reduce the risk
to humans of the transmission of zoonotic pathogens in the
food production and marketing chain associated with
traditional food markets.

Successful control interventions to reduce the risk of zoonotic
disease transmission during the marketing of live animals
require a One Health approach. This means collaboration
between human health authorities, food safety authorities,
veterinary public health agencies; and wildlife, forestry and
environmental agencies.8

1. Emergency regulations to suspend live wild
animal sales in traditional food markets

WHO, OIE and UNEP have developed this interim guidance
for national food safety competent authorities on how they
can reduce the risk of human infection and contain the
potential spread of COVID-19 and other zoonoses from
traditional food markets or live animal markets.

WHO, OIE and UNEP call on all national competent
authorities to suspend the trade in live caught wild animals
of mammalian species for food or breeding and close
sections of food markets selling live caught wild animals of
mammalian species as an emergency measure unless
demonstrable effective regulations and adequate risk
assessment are in place.

Traditional food markets
Traditional food markets, sometimes referred to as “wet
markets”, vary widely from country to country and even from
province to province, depending on the local culture,
socioeconomic conditions, food varieties and dietary
preferences. In many countries, such markets are the main
source of affordable fresh food, especially for many lowincome groups. Traditional food markets have an important
economic, cultural and social role and are a source of
livelihoods for millions of people in both urban and rural
areas. However, all traditional food markets should have one
major thing in common: they should provide the community
with safe and nutritious food.

There is a strong association between the marketing and sale
of live wild animals and the emergence of novel zoonotic
pathogens.8 Animals, particularly wild animals, are reported
to be the source of more than 70% of all emerging infectious
diseases in humans,9,1012 many of which are caused by novel
viruses. Traditional markets, where live animals are held,
slaughtered and dressed, pose a particular risk for pathogen
transmission to workers and customers alike. To mitigate this
risk, an immediate emergency measure for regulatory
authorities would be to introduce regulations to close these
markets or those parts of the markets where live caught wild
animals of mammalian species are kept or sold to reduce the
potential for transmission of zoonotic pathogens.

A typical traditional market is a semi-open space with
vending stalls organized in rows with narrow aisles. Water is
used for washing fresh produce, for food preparation, such as
filleting fish, and dressing of animal carcasses after slaughter;
and for cleaning work surfaces, floors and drains. Water from
melting ice used to chill foods also contributes to the “wet
market” environment.

These emergency measures should be of a temporary nature
while responsible competent authorities conduct a risk
assessment of each market to identify critical areas and
practices that contribute to the transmission of zoonotic
pathogens. Any such new regulations should include
provisions for identifying the source of animals to ensure that
live caught wild animals are not illegally introduced to
wildlife farms, thus increasing the risk of transmission of
zoonotic pathogens circulating in wild populations.

Traditional food markets are usually divided into sectors that
sell different categories of food products. Some areas of the
market, for instance, where fish are sold, will be designated
wet and those selling dried spices or cereals will be
designated as dry. Cooked foods are also frequently sold for
consumption in the market area and as take-away foods. As
space is usually expensive, stalls may be very close to each
other, with little or no physical separation.

These emergency regulations should be timebound,
specifying the date and stipulating the conditions when they
no longer apply, when they should be revised or their
application should be renewed. The conditions for closure or
re-opening of a market or section of a market should be
included in the emergency regulations. Competent authorities
should work with market managers to introduce measures to
mitigate identified risks. Markets or section of markets should
be allowed to reopen only on condition that they meet

Traditional food markets are usually governed by complex
administrative structures with multiple overlapping
responsibilities between different regulatory and law
enforcement agencies. Such markets may also be
characterized by the inadequate allocation of financial

-3 -

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
required food safety, hygiene and environmental standards
and comply with regulations.

Such strategies envisage phasing out live animal marketing
and slaughter in proximity to the public or physically
separating such activities to reduce the risks of transmission
of zoonotic diseases. Slaughter and dressing should be carried
out in suitable facilities under control of the official
veterinary service for ante- and post-mortem inspections25.
Key areas needed for inclusion in plans to upgrade hygiene
and sanitation standards are sanitary facilities (toilets, hand
washing), pest control, waste management and disposal (solid
and liquid wastes), drains and sewage disposal. Food
handling and marketing activities should be moved to wellmaintained stalls where surfaces can be easily washed and
disinfected.

It is important to note that there is no evidence to suggest that
SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted by the consumption of meat from
wild animals that is hygienically handled and adequately
cooked.2,11 There is, however, a risk of direct transmission to
humans from contact with the saliva, blood, urine, mucus,
faeces or other body fluids of an infected wild animal.
Furthermore, there is an additional risk of becoming infected
in areas where animals are housed in markets or from contact
with objects or surfaces that have been contaminated with
SARS-CoV-2.12,28,29
These new regulations should be introduced as part of an
overall strategy to encourage behaviour change with regard to
live wild animal markets. Incentives should be considered to
encourage safer practices, and risk communication will play
an important role in getting buy-in from key stakeholders.
There is always the risk that prohibition will not deter all
traders in the marketplace and that trade may continue
illegally. Penalties for infringement of the new regulations
should be sufficiently punitive to encourage compliance, and
resources for enforcement must be considered. Additional
measures should be considered to support or encourage
traders and others involved in the trade of live wildlife for
food to find new sources of livelihood.

WHO has developed guidelines that national governments
can use to improve hygiene and sanitation standards in
traditional food markets15,17 and is further refining these
guidelines in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Measures
recommended by WHO to prevent the spread of infection
should be followed when customers are visiting traditional
food markets.16 These measures include regular hand washing
with soap and potable wa ter after touching animals and
animal products, but preferably, customers should avoid
touching animals and touching their own eyes, nose or mouth.
It may seem more challenging to implement WHOrecommended physical distancing measures in crowded
market settings, but market authorities can design one-way
systems for customers to move between stalls and remain at
least one metre apart. Competent authorities responsible for
food safety should develop communication campaigns to
inform consumers about the risks associated with the
handling, slaughter and marketing of live caught wild animals
and the rationale for better regulation of such practices. Such
campaigns would also present an opportunity to educate
individuals whose livelihood depends on wild animals and the
general public on the adverse effects of unsustainable use of
wildlife on biological diversity and the integrity of
ecosystems.

2. Improving standards of hygiene and sanitation in
traditional food markets to reduce the risk of
transmission of zoonotic diseases and person-toperson transmission of disease
WHO, OIE and UNEP call on national competent
authorities to strengthen the regulatory basis for improving
standards of hygiene and sanitation in traditional food
markets to reduce the risk of transmission of zoonotic
diseases. During this pandemic, additional measures for
crowd control and physical distancing, hand washing and
sanitizing stations as well as education on respiratory
hygiene including on use of face masks should be
introduced in market settings to limit the possibility of
person-to-person transmission of disease.

Competent authorities responsible for market management
should implement appropriate interim biosecurity measures
during the pandemic, including:
•

Traditional food markets have often been associated with the
spread of zoonotic diseases and major foodborne disease
outbreaks.8, Conditions in some traditional food markets
represent both food safety and occupational health risks that
can be addressed only by improving hygiene and sanitation
conditions. Examples of such improvements that have
reduced the spread of disease are the interventions taken to
reduce the spread of avian influenza and other emerging
zoonotic pathogens in China, Indonesia and Thailand, among
other countries.15,16 Competent authorities with
responsibilities for managing traditional food markets must
learn from these lessons of the past, adopt the concept of
Healthy Food Markets8 and develop integrated strategies for
improving standards of hygiene and sanitation.

•
•
•
•
•
•

-4 -

limiting the number of customers who enter the
traditional food market to avoid overcrowding
ensuring queue control by painting floor markings,
where feasible, consistent with physical distancing
advice on entry to the traditional food market
providing hand sanitizers, spray disinfectants and
disposable paper towels at market entry points
ensuring compliance with the use of face masks as
per national and local rules or recommendations
using floor markings inside the market to facilitate
compliance with physical distancing
installing plexiglass barriers to avoid direct exposure
of consumers to live animals
encouraging the use of contactless payments

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
•

slaughter, dressing, handling and preparation of both
domestic and wild animals are essential.

ensuring that daily cleaning and sanitation of the
market, including waste management, meet rigorous
standards.

Farms that produce wild animals need to be registered,
approved and inspected for animal health and welfare
standards by relevant competent authorities iv. In situations
where live farmed wild animals are sold in traditional food
markets, a set of food regulations, structural hygiene and
sanitation standards should be developed and enforced for the
markets. These food regulations should focus on removing
public access to the areas where animals are slaughtered and
dressed. The slaughtering process should be supervised by
veterinary inspectors and conducted in a separate hygienic
area with restricted access. This separation and oversight are
essential because the location where animals are held,
slaughtered, and dressed can become contaminated with
faeces and other secretions, thus risking transmission of
pathogens to workers and customers.

3. Food regulations to control the farming and sale
of wild animals that are intended to be placed on
the market for human consumption
WHO, OIE and UNEP call on all national competent
authorities to conduct risk assessments to provide the
evidence base for developing regulations to control the
risks of tra nsmission of zoonotic microorganisms from
farmed wild animals and caught wild animals intended for
breeding or human consumption. Regulations should
address the traceability of farmed wild animals to ensure
that they are distinguished from caught wild animals and
should include strict biosecurity measures.
The farming of wild animals is common practice in many
parts of the world.13 National food regulations should include
strict on-farm biosecurity measures to prevent the
introduction or spread of zoonotic diseases. As with all foods
of animal origin, specific hygiene requirements for the
production, processing and marketing of foods of animal
origin must be included in all national food regulations. Such
food regulations should include provisions for adopting a
risk-based systematic approach to assess and control
microbial hazards across the food chain to enhance food
safety. Competent authorities for veterinary controls that are
responsible for overseeing and enforcing regulations related
to foods of animal origin and zoonoses will need to inspect
wild animal farms and the places where such animals are
processed for food, distributed and marketed to ensure
compliance. Several other adjustments may be needed. First,
specific national regulations relating to animal health and
welfare should apply on the farm. Second, ante- and postmortem inspection should apply at the time of slaughter.
Third, hygiene and sanitation requirements should apply at all
stages of production, processing and marketing. Last,
traceability requirements are necessary.

4. Training of food and veterinary inspectors in the
compliance and enforcement of new regulations
WHO, OIE and UNEP call on national competent
authorities to ensure that food inspectors are adequately
trained to ensure that businesses comply with regulations
to protect consumers’ health and are held accountable. In
addition, competent authorities responsible for managing
food markets should be adequately resourced, so that
regulations focused on food animal production, processing
and marketing are consistently enforced.
Food inspection is a critical component of a national food
safety control system, since it aims to ensure that food being
sold meets the safety requirements deﬁned by food
legislation. To meet this goal, food and veterinary inspectors
must be trained, qualiﬁed and free from conflicts of
interests.18 Competent authority staff carrying out inspections
of wildlife farms or markets that sell farmed wild animals
must be adequately trained to enable them to undertake their
duties competently and independently and to perform food
safety controls in a consistent manner. The competent
authority should prepare an annual training plan and maintain
training records for each food inspector and ensure that these
records are kept up to date. Enforcement practices should be
documented. Food and veterinary inspectors should work
closely with wildlife authorities under clear protocols to
identify illegally traded wild species and to enforce relevant
national and international regulations.
Competent authorities responsible for ma naging traditional
food markets should also be adequately resourced so that
regulations focused on food animal production, processing,
and marketing are consistently enforced.

Farmed wild animals present an occupational hazard for all
workers in the food chain 14 because the animals may be the
source of zoonotic pathogens. Animal health inspections are
a valuable means to identify the clinical signs caused by these
microorganisms and to exclude animals displaying such signs
from the food chain. However, not all zoonotic agents
produce outward signs of disease in the animal hosts. Many
microbiological hazards, particularly those that are carried
only in the gastrointestinal tract, may not cause animal
disease. Pathogens present in the gastrointestinal tract of an
animal may contaminate food products and the immediate
environment. Thus, strong surveillance of farming and
husbandry practices and good hygiene practices in the

iv

Appendix-I animal species for commercial purposes are registered
with the CITES Secretariat in order for the specimens to be traded
internationally (. https://www.cites.org/eng/resources/registers.php)

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)requires that operations that breed

-5 -

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
5. Strengthening surveillance systems for zoonotic
pathogens

countries to improve standards of hygiene and sanitation in
traditional food markets where live animals are sold. 17,21
During the avian influenza and SARS outbreaks in China,
high-risk practices in market settings were identified, and
interventions were implemented.21 Communication and
training programmes aimed at reducing the risk of disease
transmission in traditional food markets in a low-cost and
sustainable manner and adapted to local contexts were also
developed.22 However such interventions need to be scaled
up.

WHO, OIE and UNEP call on national competent
authorities to strengthen animal health surveillance systems
for zoonotic pathogens and to include both domestic and
wild animals. This will provide an early warning for
pathogen emergence and provide the evidence base for the
development of controls to prevent risks to human health,
in association with public health surveillance systems.
Disease surveillance is an information-based activity
involving the collection, analysis and interpretation of data
for action relating to diseases in animals and humans. During
the current pandemic and the management of other zoonotic
events, it is critical that all national agencies responsible for
surveillance cooperate to ensure coherent and appropriate risk
communication and risk management responses.19 Currently,
human health surveillance is the responsibility of the public
health sector and surveillance in domestic animals is the
responsibility of the veterinary services.

To successfully implement an information campaign aimed at
reducing the risk of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and
emerging zoonoses in traditional food market settings, the
first step is an assessment of market workers’ knowledge on
issues related to food hygiene, food safety, COVID-19 and its
transmission and emerging zoonoses and their current
behaviours related to this. Surveys and knowledge, attitude,
practice (KAP) studies will be needed to collect and evaluate
relevant data to tailor subsequent information campaigns to
the needs of market workers and market customers and thus
raise their awareness of the risks associated with handling live
wild animals and the measures that can be taken to reduce or
mitigate these risks.

Wildlife disease surveillance, when it exists, is usually the
responsibility of veterinary services and the forestry,
environment or wildlife sectors. It is important that the
national domestic animal and wildlife surveillance systems
for zoonotic pathogens, which give early warning for
pathogen emergence, are closely coordinated with public
health surveillance to provide opportunities to control such
pathogens before they can affect human health.20 Wildlife
disease surveillance systems are not yet common but need
urgently to be developed and coordinated with domestic
animal health surveillance programmes.

Traditional food markets are frequented regularly by large
numbers of people, providing opportunities to convey
messages aimed at educating workers and visitors on food
safety and the risks of transmission of zoonoses. In addition,
formal training sessions for market workers and stall holders
should be developed and designed to minimally disrupt work
schedules. Easy to understand messages should be tailored for
dissemination across several platforms, including social
media channels and mobile phones, to encourage behavioural
change.

A working group or committee should be established at
national level to share information on surveillance systems in
humans, domestic animals and wildlife. This committee
would need to determine practical ways to coordinate human
and animal disease surveillance at the national level,
including data management, communication networks and
national and regional laboratory networks using One Health
approaches.

The “five keys to safer food” educational material developed
by WHO provides readily available basic food safety
information.23

References
1. OIE. April 2020. Statement of the OIE Wildlife
Working Group, April 2020 - Wildlife Trade and
Emerging
Zoonotic
Diseases
https://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Our_scient
ific_expertise/docs/pdf/COV19/A_OIEWildlifeTradeStatement_April2020.pdf

6. Food safety information campaigns for market
traders, stall holders and consumers
WHO, OIE and UNEP call on national competent
authorities to develop and implement food safety
information campaigns for market traders, stall holders,
consumers and the wider general public. These campaigns
should communicate the principles of food safety and the
risks of transmission of zoonotic pathogens at the humananimal interface and the risks associated with the
consumption and trade of wildlife. The campaigns should
also disseminate information to all stakeholders about the
importance of biodiversity and the need for any use of
wildlife to be legal, sustainable, safe and responsible.

2. FAO. Food safety in the time of COVID-19 (2020)
http://www.fao.org/3/ca8623en/CA8623EN.pdf
3. Wendong Li, Zhengli Shi, Meng Yu, Wuze Ren, et
al. Bats are natural reservoirs of SARS-like
coronaviruses. Science 310, 676-679, (2005).
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/310/5748/676
4. Ren, Li-Li; Wang, Ye-Ming; et.al. Identification of
a novel coronavirus causing severe pneumonia in
human, Chin Med J 133, 1015-1024 (2020).
doi: 10.1097/cm9.0000000000000722

WHO, together with FAO and OIE have gained considerable
experience over the years through collaborative efforts with

-6 -

Reducing public health risks associated with the sale of live wild animals of mammalian species in traditional food markets
5. Zhong, NS, Zheng, BJ et. al. Epidemiology and
cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
in Guangdong, People’s Republic of China, in
February, 2003. Lancet; 362: 1353–58. (2003)
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14630-2

18. OIE. OIE Competency Guidelines for Veterinary
Paraprofessionals (2018)
https://www.oie.int/fileadmin/Home/eng/Support_to
_OIE_Members/docs/pdf/A_Competence.pdf
19. WHO. Surveillance of foodborne diseases. 26
January 2018.
https://www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/foodbor
ne-diseases/fbd_surveillance/en/

6. Guan, Y, Zheng, BJ et al. Isolation and
Characterization of Viruses Related to the SARS
Coronavirus from Animals in Southern China.
Science; 302, 276-278, (2003).
Doi: 10.1126/science.1087139

20. OIE. Questions and Answers COVID-19.
https://www.oie.int/scientific-expertise/specificinformation-and-recommendations/questions-andanswers-on-2019novel-coronavirus/

7. Mounts, A.W., Kwong, H. et. al. Case-Control
Study of Risk Factors for Avian Influenza A (H5N1)
Disease, Hong Kong, 1997. J Infect Dis; 180, 505–
508, (1999). https://doi.org/10.1086/314903

21. FAO/OIE/WHO. Influenza and other emerging
zoonotic diseases at the human-animal interface
(2010). http://www.fao.org/3/a-i1963e.pdf

8. WHO. A Guide to Healthy Food Markets (2006)
https://www.who.int/foodsafety/capacity/healthy_m
arketplaces/en/

22. WHO. Healthy Market Project: reducing risks of
avian influenza transmission in traditional food
market settings. (2010) USAID funded project
AAG-P-00-01-0001. WHO, Geneva.

9. Kuiken, T., Leighton, FA, et al, Pathogen
Surveillance in Animals. Science ; 309, 1680-1681
(2005). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1113310

23. WHO. Five keys to safer food manual (2006)
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43546/1/978
9241594639_eng.pdf?ua=1

10. Van Dorn, HR. Emerging Infectious Diseases Medicine (Abingdon). 42: 60–63, (2014). Published
online 2013 Dec 21.
doi:10.1016/j.mpmed.2013.10.014

24. Can, O.E. et al. Dealing in deadly pathogens: taking
stock of the legal trade in live wildlife and potential
risk to human health. Glob Ecol Conserv. Vol 17,
January 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2018.e00515

11. Darnell, k. et al (2004) Inactivation of the
coronavirus that induces severe acute respiratory
syndrome, SARS-CoV. J Vir Methods. 121, 85-91
12. Zhang, X et al. Strategies to trace back the origin of
COVID-19. J Infect. Vol 80, 39-40. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.03.032

25. FAO. 2019. Technical guidance principles of riskbased meat inspection and their application. Rome,
FAO.
http://www.fao.org/3/ca5465en/CA5465EN.pdf

13. FAO. Wildlife farming and domestication in:
Wildlife and food security in Africa (1997).
http://www.fao.org/3/w7540e/w7540e0f.htm

26. El Masry, I., von Dobschuetz, S., Plee, L., Larfaoui,
F., Yang, Z., Song, J., Pfeiffer, D., Calvin, S.,
Roberts, H., Lorusso, A., Barton-Behravesh, C.,
Zheng, Z., Kalpravidh, W. & Sumption, K. 2020.
Exposure of humans or animals to SARS-CoV-2
from wild, livestock, companion and aquatic
animals: Qualitative exposure assessment. FAO
animal production and health, Paper 181. Rome,
FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9959en

14. OIE. Terrestrial Animal Health Code (2019).
https://www.oie.int/standard-setting/terrestrialcode/access-online/
15. FAO/OIE/WHO. FSO/OIE/WHO Stop the spread:
Measures to stop the spread of highly pathogenic
bird flu at its source (2005)
https://www.who.int/influenza/resources/documents/
stop_spread_bird_flu/en/

27. Xu RH, He JF, Evans MR, et al. Epidemiologic
clues to SARS origin in China. Emerg Infect Dis.
2004;10(6):1030-1037. doi:10.3201/eid1006.030852

16. WHO. WHO recommendations to reduce risk of
transmission of emerging pathogens from animals to
humans in live animal markets or animal product
markets 26 March 2020.
https://apps.who.int/iris/rest/bitstreams/1278909/retr
ieve

28. WHO. Mask use in the context of COVID-19.
Interim guidance. (1December 2020)
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/advice-onthe-use-of-masks-in-the-community-during-homecare-and-in-healthcare-settings-in-the-context-ofthe-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-outbreak

17. World Health Organization, Regional Office for
South-East Asia. (2006). Public health interventions
for prevention and control of avian influenza. WHO
Regional Office for South-East
Asia. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/205700

29. WHO. Roadmap to improve and ensure good indoor
ventilation in the context of COVID-19 (1 March
2021)
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/978924002
1280

-7 -

WHO continues to monitor the situation closely for any changes that may affect this interim guidance. Should any factors change,
WHO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this interim guidance document will expire 2 years after the date of publication.
© World Health Organization 2021. Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/Wet_Markets/2021.1

-8-

