Considerations for implementing and adjusting public
health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Interim guidance
4 November 2020
must be weighed against the impacts these measures have on
societies and individuals. Considerations include impact on the
economy, security, mental health and psychosocial well-being,
human rights, food security, socioeconomic disparities,
continuity of health and public health programmes, treatment
and management of conditions other than COVID-19, genderbased violence, and public sentiment and adherence to PHSM.
The overall health and wellbeing of communities should
therefore be at the forefront of considerations when deciding on
and implementing PHSM.

Key points
• Public health and social measures (PHSM) have
proven critical to limiting transmission of COVID19 and reducing deaths.
• The decision to introduce, adapt or lift PHSM
should be based primarily on a situational
assessment of the intensity of transmission and the
capacity of the health system to respond, but must
also be considered in light of the effects these
measures may have on the general welfare of
society and individuals .

PHSM include personal protective measures (such as hand
hygiene, respiratory etiquette, mask wearing); environmental
measures (such as cleaning, disinfection, ventilation),
surveillance and response measures (including contact tracing,
isolation and quarantine); physical distancing measures (e.g.
limiting the size of gatherings, maintaining distance in public
or workplaces, domestic movement restrictions); and
international travel-related measures.1 PHSM act in concert,
and a combination of measures is required to ensure adequate
control. Measures should be tailored to the lowest
administrative level for which situational assessment is
possible and measures can be enacted practically.

• Indicators and suggested thresholds are provided to
gauge both the intensity of transmission and the
capacity of the health system to respond; taken
together, these provide a basis for guiding the
adjustment of PHSM. Measures are indicative and
need to be tailored to local contexts.
• PHSM must be continuously adjusted to the
intensity of transmission and capacity of the health
system in a country and at sub-national levels.

Changes from the previous version

• When PHSM are adjusted, communities should be
fully consulted and engaged before changes are
made.

This document provides guidance to help Member States assess
the situation at national and sub-national levels, as well as key
recommendations about the implementation of PHSM. It should
be read in conjunction with WHO interim guidance on Critical
preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19,2
which addresses several other elements of preparedness,
readiness and response for COVID-19 beyond PHSM.

Introduction
This document is an update to the interim guidance published
on 16 April 2020 entitled “Considerations in adjusting public
health and social measures in the context of COVID-19”.

The new guidance contains several important changes. First,
it provides an updated transmission classification, subdividing ‘community transmission’ into four sub-categories,
from low to very high incidence. The associated annex
provides revised indicators and thresholds for determining the
transmission classification, as well as the current health
system capacity. The document then provides a situational
assessment matrix, which takes into consideration the
transmission classification and the health system response
capacity to arrive at an overall Situational Level. Finally, the
document provides guidance about the PHSM to implement
or adjust at each Situational Level.

Public health and social measures (PHSM) are being
implemented across the globe to limit transmission and
reduce mortality and morbidity from COVID-19. PHSM
include non-pharmaceutical individual and societal
interventions to control COVID-19.
As the pandemic unfolds, PHSM should be regularly reviewed
and adapted and their effectiveness in controlling SARS-CoV-2
transmission evaluated. This requires agile decision-making
based on ongoing situational assessments at the most local
administrative level possible. Such assessments should be based
on a risk/benefit approach considering the intensity of
transmission, the health system’s capacity to respond, other
contextual considerations (such as upcoming events which may
alter transmission or capacity) and the overall strategic approach
to responding to COVID-19 in each specific setting. Decisions
to tighten, loosen, or introduce PHSM to control COVID-19

This guidance document is intended for public health and
health services decision-makers at all operational levels (i.e.,
at any level at which decisions about tailored PHSM are made)
and technical actors involved in relevant sectors (e.g.
-1-

Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance

community engagement, education,
supporting or impacted by PHSM.

social

services)

The Annex below provides the method for assessing the
health system response capacity.

Situational assessment using transmission level and
response capacity

Transmission scenarios
Assessing the level of transmission is key to assessing the
overall COVID-19 situation in a given area and therefore
guiding essential decisions on response activities and
tailoring epidemic control measures.

The decision to introduce, adapt or lift PHSM, or to scale up
health system capacity, should be based on an analysis of the
level of transmission, the health system response capacity,
and other contextual factors.

WHO previously defined four transmission scenarios to
describe the dynamic of the epidemic: no reported cases
(including both zero transmission and the absence of detected
and reported cases), sporadic cases, clusters of cases and
community transmission.

Based on the joint assessment of these factors, a Situational
Level should be assigned to a geographic area that will inform
whether and how to adjust PHSM (see Table 1). The
assessment should be strengthened through examination of
quantitative and qualitative information from multiples
sources, which should be triangulated to provide an additional
reality check on the assessed Situational Level. The resultant
Situational Levels should only be considered indicative
because they may not correspond well to the response
required in a specific context. For example, in a small island
developing state with limited capacity, stringent PHSM may
be warranted at a relatively low level of transmission.

With many countries now experiencing community
transmission and seeking to adjust PHSM to various levels of
intensity, an update of the transmission classification has
been developed to provide more granularity. A range of
indicators to capture transmission intensity, thereby aiding
decision making, also has been developed.
The community transmission (CT) classification is now divided
into four levels, from low incidence (CT1) to very high incidence
(CT4). Consequently, there are now seven categories (the
definitions below are abbreviated; details about the transmission
classifications can be found in an Annex to this guidance entitled
“Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures
in the context of COVID-19”).
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The indicators should be monitored regularly (e.g. biweekly)
and the Situational Level assessed accordingly to inform the
appropriateness and impact of the PHSM measures taken and
to anticipate future changes.
Table 1: Situational Level assessment matrix using
transmission level and response capacity indicators to guide
adjustment of PHSM

No (active) cases
Imported / Sporadic cases
Clusters of cases
CT1: Low incidence of locally acquired widely
dispersed cases detected in the past 14 days
CT2: Moderate incidence of locally acquired
widely dispersed cases detected in the past 14 days
CT3: High incidence of locally acquired widely
dispersed cases in the past 14 days
CT4: Very high incidence of locally acquired
widely dispersed cases in the past 14 days

Response capacity
Transmission level

The transmission level classification for a geographic area
will change (improve or worsen) over time, and different
geographic areas within a country will likely experience
different levels of transmission concurrently.
Community engagement strategies based on community
perceptions, needs and feedback should be implemented to
inform PHSM decision making with the objective that the
community perceives that it owns the public health response.

Adequate Moderate

Limited

No cases

0

0

1

Imported/Sporadic cases

0

1

1

Clusters of cases

1

1

2

Community - CT1

1

2

2

Community - CT2

2

2

3

Community - CT3

2

3

3

Community - CT4

3

3

4

• Situational Level 0 corresponds to a situation with no
known transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the preceding
28 days. The health system and public health
authorities are ready to respond, but there should be no
restrictions on daily activities.

The process for determining the transmission classification is
outlined in the Annex below.

Response capacity

• Situational Level 1 is a situation where basic
measures are in place to prevent transmission; or if
cases are already present, the epidemic is being
controlled through effective measures around the
cases or clusters of cases, with limited and transient
localized disruption to social and economic life.

In addition to assessing the level of transmission, it is also
necessary to understand the available health system response
capacity–depending on whether there is adequate, moderate,
or limited capacity, the same level of transmission can result
in a drastically different situation and require a different
degree of PHSM implementation. For the purposes of this
document, ‘response capacity’ encompasses both clinical
care and public health services, and is measured in terms of
both the actual capacity (ability) to deliver services, and the
performance of those services.

• Situational Level 2 represents a situation with low
community incidence or a risk of community
transmission beyond clusters. Additional measures
may be required to control transmission; however,
-2-

Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance

disruptions to social and economic activities can still
be limited.

• Any decision to apply stringent PHSM must weigh in
equal measure the impact of the measures (lives lost in
the short and long term compared to lives saved by
applying PHSM).
• Protection of vulnerable populations (including those
clinically at risk for severe disease [aged >60 years
and/or with comorbidities that increase risk of serious
COVID-19 disease], and disadvantaged groups such
as marginalized populations, migrants and refugees,
and those in high density/low resource settings and
lower income groups) should be central in the decision
to implement, maintain or lift a measure.
• Policies restricting travel between areas should be
based on an assessment of their respective
transmission levels and health system capacities, with
the objectives of avoiding re-seeding of lowertransmission areas and of minimizing further burden
on stretched health systems. In all cases, essential
workers should be permitted to travel as needed to
support continuation of essential services.
• When lifting PHSM, the potential impact of lifting
those measures on the capacity of the system to rapidly
respond to any new increase in cases should be
considered.
– Adequate health system capacities should be
in place to detect, test and manage new cases.
– The risk of outbreaks in settings with
vulnerable individuals should be minimized.
This requires identifying all major drivers of
COVID-19 transmission (e.g. various types
of closed settings) in the local context, with
appropriate measures in place to maximize
physical distancing and minimize the risk of
new outbreaks. Measures must be in place to
reduce the risk of nosocomial transmission
and outbreaks in settings such as care homes.
– Key drivers of transmission in the local area
under assessment must be well understood
using local surveillance data, and measures
should rapidly be re-implemented should
incidence increase. A particular focus should
be on prevention and earlier detection of
potential superspreading events.

• Situational Level 3 is a situation of community
transmission with limited additional capacity to
respond and a risk of health services becoming
overwhelmed. A larger combination of measures may
need to be put in place to limit transmission, manage
cases, and ensure epidemic control.
• Situational Level 4 corresponds to an uncontrolled
epidemic with limited or no additional health system
response capacity available, thus requiring extensive
measures to avoid overwhelming of health services
and substantial excess morbidity and mortality.

Adjusting public health and social measures
Key principles
Decisions on which measures to implement, lift or strengthen
and the order in which these measures should occur, should
be based on the following guiding principles:
• Measures with the highest level of acceptability and
feasibility, proven effectiveness–and which minimize
the negative consequences on health and well-being of
all members of society and the economy–should be
considered first. Acceptability and feasibility should
be determined through active discussion with
community members in order to maximize the
likelihood of compliance and adherence, while
effectiveness and potential negative effects of PHSM
should be evaluated through an evidence-based
assessment (e.g. literature review, WHO guidance, etc)
and active monitoring of the impact of implemented
PHSM.
• Additional measures should be considered as soon as
the situation deteriorates and the Situational Level
increases. Delays in implementation of measures have
been linked to increased mortality and the need for
more stringent measures to regain control. In
particular, every effort should be made to prevent an
intensification in transmission from ‘clusters’ to
‘community transmission.’
• When feasible, measures should be adopted (or lifted)
in a controlled, stepwise manner to allow better
understanding of the effects of each measure on
transmission dynamics.
• Public health surveillance data and case and cluster
investigations may provide important information on
conditions associated with transmission. Such
information may help targeting application or
intensification of certain PHSM without imposing the
measures universally on all settings.
• Vulnerable communities and disadvantaged
individuals may face immediate challenges in
meeting their basic life needs, such as income, shelter
and food, when stringent PHSM are imposed. It is
crucial that those essential needs be addressed before
measures are instituted to enable people to comply.
It is critical to safeguard vulnerable and
disadvantaged populations by implementing specific
measures to support them, mobilizing resources and
engaging all relevant sectors and communities to
learn about their concerns and receive feedback.

When PHSM are adjusted, communities should be fully
consulted and engaged before changes are made.3 Clear,
concise and transparent communication, including an
evidence-based rationale for changing measures, should be
developed with communities targeted for PHSM.
In particular:
• Communities should be given recognized roles to
provide input on when and how PHSM will be
implemented or lifted.
• Communities will be critical to implementing
population-wide PHSM and contributing to the
mitigation of the social and economic impact of
certain measures (e.g. disrupting availability of food
and other needed supplies).
• Feedback mechanisms should be established to ensure
that any societal impact of changes to PHSM are
quickly identified and reported for action.
Communities should lead solutions to ensure adoption
of measures that best meet local needs (for example by
-3-

Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance

considering local cultural practices) and increase
likelihood of adherence.
• Local community level networks should be leveraged
for sustained efforts, building capacity through
training of local leaders.
• The infodemic4 that has emerged from a COVID-19
information and disinformation overload should be
managed at all stages of the response by providing the
right information at the right time to the right people
through trusted channels (e.g. community and faith
leaders, family doctors and other influential members
of society).
• A communication and community engagement
strategy should be developed before any changes to
PHSM are implemented.3 The strategy should be
developed in consultation with relevant stakeholders
from government, civil society and community groups.
Plans should include, at a minimum, behavioural
objectives, target audiences, priority channels and a
mix of strategies and activities to inform and engage

the public. Key information such as the extent and
estimated duration of the measures in place should be
part of the priority messaging of developed plans.
Community engagement is essential not only for
compliance and support for public health measures but
also for the development of adaptive social measures
and to inform PHSM decision making.
PHSM implementation based on situational assessment
Table 2 provides more detail on what types of measures may
be implemented for each Situational Level. The measures at
each level are indicative, since some measures may be more
or less feasible or appropriate in specific contexts and
locations. Note that recommendations on international travel
can be found in a separate document.5
Measures should be time-bound and regularly re-assessed, at
least every two weeks, along with the Situational Level.

Table 2: Guidance on the implementation of PHSM for each level of severity
Situational Level
Situational Level 0: No
known transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 in the
preceding 28 days. The
health system and public
health authorities are ready
to respond, but there should
be no restrictions on daily
activities

Situational Level 1: Basic
measures are in place to
prevent transmission; or if
cases are already present, the
epidemic is being controlled
through effective measures
around the cases or clusters
of cases, with limited and
transient localized disruption
to social and economic life.

Considerations for implementation of PHSM by Situational Level*
At this level, surveillance should ensure that any new case can be detected and managed as early as
possible, but there should be no restrictions on daily activities.
Authorities may consider implementing the following measures:
• Continue strengthening emergency preparedness and response, ensuring adequate stockpiles of
medicines and medical equipment and that sufficient staff have been recruited and trained to
handle anticipated surges in workload.
• Individuals should apply basic individual precautionary measures and behaviours such as hand
hygiene,6 cough etiquette, staying home / wearing a mask7 if unwell and voluntary physical
distancing.
• Robust surveillance8 should be in place to rapidly detect and investigate suspected cases and
clusters9 and ensure public health measures such as isolation and quarantine10 are undertaken to
reduce onward spread if cases are confirmed and contacts are traced, respectively.
• Travel outside the area should be permitted as per national policy; attention should be paid to
the risk of introduction of the virus into the area by travellers from higher incidence areas.
• Clear information should be provided to the public about what to do if unwell and whom to
contact for advice, testing and/or treatment.
At this level, specific measures should be taken around cases and/or clusters, and individual
measures should be strengthened, with limited impact on social and economic activities.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, individual
precautionary measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the
following measures:
• Emphasis should be placed on case and cluster detection, investigation, tracking and tracing of
contacts.
• Individual should apply individual precautionary measures and behaviours such as hand
hygiene, cough etiquette, staying home if unwell, wearing a mask where appropriate, and
physical distancing.
• Promote avoidance of the ‘3 Cs’ – closed spaces, crowded places and close-contact settings.
• Daily activities and services, such as educational settings,11 businesses12 and leisure/tourism
can remain open with safety measures in place to limit the risk of spread.
• Measures should be in place to protect the most vulnerable, particularly ensuring that there are
appropriate measures in place in long-term care13 and other residential facilities.

-4-

Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance

Situational Level
Situational Level 2: Low
community incidence or a
risk of community
transmission beyond
clusters. Additional
measures may be required to
control transmission;
however, disruptions to
social and economic
activities can still be limited

Considerations for implementation of PHSM by Situational Level*
At this level, measures should be applied to limit the number of social encounters in the community
while ensuring services can remain open with safety measures in place. A wider range of PHSM
may be required to control transmission.

Situational Level 3:
Community transmission
with limited additional
capacity to respond and a
risk of health services
becoming overwhelmed. A
larger combination of
measures may need to be put
in place to limit
transmission, manage cases,
and ensure epidemic control.

At this level, a strengthening of all PHSM is needed to avoid more stringent restrictions on
movement and other related measures applied under level 4. All individuals should reduce their
social contacts, and some activities may need to close while allowing for essential services and in
particular schools to remain open.

Situational Level 4: An
uncontrolled epidemic with
limited or no additional
health system response
capacity available, thus
requiring extensive
measures to avoid
overwhelming of health
services and substantial
excess morbidity and
mortality.

At this level, reducing transmission in the community will be challenging, and more stringent
movement restrictions and related measures may need to be put in place to significantly reduce the
number of in-person encounters. Such measures should geographically limited to where needed, be
time-bound and aimed to be as short as reasonably possible.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, individual
precautionary measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the
following measures:
• Individuals should stay at home and limit social contact with people outside the household.
• Essential workers will need to continue activities, with maximum support and safety measures
in place.
• Closure of non-essential businesses or remote working.
• Consider all options for continuity of in-person learning. If not possible, limit in-person
contact. This may include in person teaching, blended or remote learning strategies that strictly
limit the number of people physically on site (exceptions would include children of essential
workers and their teachers). The closure of educational facilities should only be considered
when there are no other alternatives.
• All long-term care and other residential facilities should consider strict measures to limit the
risk of infection, such as prohibiting in-person visitors.

In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, individual
precautionary measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the
following measures:
• Education settings remain open with infection prevention and control (IPC) measures in place.
• Businesses remain open, with safety measures in place, with teleworking encouraged as much
as possible.
• Individual should apply individual precautionary measures and behaviours such as hand
hygiene, cough etiquette, staying home if unwell, wearing a mask where appropriate, physical
distancing and avoiding the ‘3C’s’ – closed spaces, crowded places and close-contact settings.
• Limit the size of social and other mass gatherings.14
• If required, further emphasis may be needed on protecting the most clinically vulnerable,
through strict application of PPE and IPC measures, heightened surveillance and managing
visits in long term care and other residential facilities.

In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, individual
precautionary measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the
following measures:
• Closure of non-essential businesses or remote working as much as possible.
• Individual should apply individual precautionary measures and behaviours such as hand
hygiene, cough etiquette, staying home if unwell, wearing a mask where appropriate, physical
distancing and avoiding the ‘3C’s’ – closed spaces, crowded places and close-contact settings.
• Consider limiting in-person university teaching, and institute e-learning.
• Childcare services and primary and secondary schools should remain open with adequate safety
and surveillance measures in place as long as the local context allows. Continuity of education
for children for their overall well-being, health and safety should be at the forefront of all
relevant considerations and decisions.
• Evaluate holding sporting and similar events, using a risk based approach; if held, they should
be held under strict safety rules, e.g. without spectators. Other mass gatherings should be
suspended, and the size of all social gatherings should be decreased.

*The specific measures implemented at each level will need to be carefully considered based on the guiding principles outlined above. The
measures at each level are indicative, since some measures may be more or less feasible or appropriate in specific contexts and locations.

-5-

Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance

References
1.

World Health Organization. Taxonomy and Glossary of Public Health and Social Measures that may be Implemented to
Limit the Spread of COVID-19. https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/documents/phsm/20200923-phms-whoint.zip?sfvrsn=691966ba_2

2.

World Health Organization. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/critical-preparedness-readiness-and-response-actions-for-covid-19

3.

World Health Organization. Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) Action Plan Guidance COVID19 Preparedness and Response https://www.who.int/publications-detail/risk-communication-and-communityengagement-(rcce)-action-plan-guidance

4.

World Health Organization. Managing the COVID-19 Infodemic - Call for Action
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240010314

5.

World Health Organization. Public Health Considerations while Resuming International Travel.
https://www.who.int/news-room/articles-detail/public-health-considerations-while-resuming-international-travel

6.

World Health Organization. Recommendations to Member States to improve hand hygiene practices to help prevent the
transmission of the COVID-19 virus. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/recommendations-to-member-states-toimprove-hand-hygiene-practices-to-help-prevent-the-transmission-of-the-covid-19-virus

7.

World Health Organization. Advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID-19 https://www.who.int/publicationsdetail/advice-on-the-use-of-masks-in-the-community-during-home-care-and-in-healthcare-settings-in-the-context-of-thenovel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-outbreak

8.

World Health Organization. Public health surveillance for COVID-19: interim guidance.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/who-2019-nCoV-surveillanceguidance-2020.7

9.

World Health Organization. Considerations in the investigation of cases and clusters of COVID-19
https://www.who.int/who-documents-detail/considerations-in-the-investigation-of-cases-and-clusters-of-covid-19

10. World Health Organization. Considerations for quarantine of individuals in the context of containment for coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) https://www.who.int/publications-detail/considerations-for-quarantine-of-individuals-in-thecontext-of-containment-for-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)
11. World Health Organization. Considerations for school-related public health measures in the context of COVID-19.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-school-related-public-health-measures-in-the-context-ofcovid-19
12. World Health Organization. Getting your workplace ready for COVID-19 https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/advice-for-workplace-clean-19-03-2020.pdf
13. World Health Organization. Infection Prevention and Control guidance for long-term care facilities in the context of
COVID-19 https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331508/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC_long_term_care-2020.1eng.pdf
14. World Health Organization. Key planning recommendations for Mass Gatherings in the context of the current COVID-19
outbreak https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665-332235

-6-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Introduction
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, countries around the globe have implemented public health and social measures (PHSM)
for epidemic control. As the local epidemiology of the disease changes, countries adjust (loosen/reinstate) these measures
accordingly.
This annex updates the annex published on 12 May 2020 and outlines a process for decision-making on adapting PHSM to the
epidemiological situation and the health system’s capacity for response. It should be read in conjunction with the main body of this
document and the interim guidance on Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19.1
This annex is intended for the public health divisions of national and sub-national authorities in locations that have introduced
PHSM and are considering adjusting them. Its guidance is restricted to the public health domain. Other documents published by
WHO address different considerations that should enter into decision-making about introducing or loosening PHSM, including
the well-being and welfare of a population.

How to use the guidance in this annex
The public health criteria in this annex are grouped into two domains that should be evaluated to address two main questions:
1.

Epidemiological situation/Transmission classification - Is the epidemic controlled?

2.

Health system and public health services capacity and performance - Is the health system able to detect and cope
with COVID-19 cases while maintaining other essential health services?

The criteria are not prescriptive, and it may not be feasible to assess some of them; for example, because of a lack of data. Countries
should focus on the criteria most relevant for them to inform decision making. The thresholds are indicative and may need to be
revisited as further information about the epidemiology of COVID-19 and the impact of measures become available. It is
recommended to systematically assess these criteria at least biweekly at the lowest operational subnational administrative
level that is practical to inform tailored local responses.

1. Epidemiological situation/Transmission classification
Transmission classification categories can be used to determine the extent to which the epidemic can be considered controlled within
each country/area and at sub-national levels. The transmission categories in one country are also useful to others when considering
changed policies on trade and travel.
Defining Transmission Classification
WHO previously defined four transmission scenarios to describe the dynamic of the epidemic: no reported cases (including both
zero transmission and the absence of detected and reported cases), sporadic cases, clusters of cases and community transmission.
The community transmission (CT) classification is now divided into four levels, from low incidence (CT1) to very high incidence
(CT4). Consequently, there are now seven categories.
Table 1: Definition of the categories for transmission classification
Category name

Definition
Countries/territories/areas with:

No (active) cases

No new cases detected for at least 28 days (two times the maximum
incubation period), in the presence of a robust* surveillance system. This
implies a near-zero risk of infection for the general population.

Imported / Sporadic cases

Cases detected in the past 14 days are all imported, sporadic (e.g. laboratory
acquired or zoonotic) or are all linked to imported/sporadic cases, and there
are no clear signals of further locally acquired transmission. This implies
minimal risk of infection for the general population.

Clusters of cases

Cases detected in the past 14 days are predominantly limited to well-defined
clusters that are not directly linked to imported cases, but which are all linked
by time, geographic location and common exposures. It is assumed that
there are a number of unidentified cases in the area. This implies a low risk
of infection to others in the wider community if exposure to these clusters is
avoided.
-7-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Category name

Definition
Countries/territories/areas with:

Community transmission – level 1 (CT1)

Low incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases detected in the
past 14 days, with many of the cases not linked to specific clusters;
transmission may be focused in certain population sub-groups. Low risk of
infection for the general population.

Community transmission – level 2 (CT2)

Moderate incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases detected in
the past 14 days; transmission less focused in certain population sub-groups.
Moderate risk of infection for the general population.

Community transmission – level 3 (CT3)

High incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases in the past 14
days; transmission widespread and not focused in population sub-groups.
High risk of infection for the general population.

Community transmission – level 4 (CT4)

Very high incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases in the past
14 days. Very high risk of infection for the general population.

* Note that in situations where COVID-19 surveillance is not robust, a lack of identified cases should not be interpreted as an
absence of transmission; alternate indicators (see Table 5) should be examined to assess the possibility of undetected COVID-19
cases.
Indicators to determine community transmission
Four primary indicators to determine community transmission are proposed in Table 2. They are based on data that should be
routinely collected during the pandemic. The relative importance of each available indicator will vary according to the local context
(e.g. the reliability of the data for each indicator); and described limitations to interpreting each indicator should be taken into
account. Indicators should be measured at the lowest administrative level of operations possible to inform targeted public health
interventions. To develop transmission classification at a higher administrative level, a separate analysis should be conducted using
indicators for the higher administrative level, rather than attempting to aggregate lower-level transmission classifications.
These indicators should be used alongside other epidemiologic information available either routinely or through special studies or
modelling estimates, as well as non-epidemiologic data and other considerations, for informing strategic and operational decisions.
It is recommended that these indicators be assessed biweekly, adopting the epidemiological week definition used in the country.
Assessing the level of community transmission
Ranges for the four indicators (in Table 2), were developed through a review of existing data. They can be used to guide the
application of the transmission classification at sub-national levels. These ranges are indicative and may require adjustment to local
contexts and based on the performance (e.g. sensitivity, representativeness) of the local surveillance system and testing strategy,
and should be revisited periodically. Caution should be exercised when interpreting changes in indicators that occur in the context
of changes to the surveillance system (e.g. an increase in testing rate or a change in the population under surveillance). Note that
some indicators (e.g. overall incidence) may be higher in the presence of very large clusters, such as mass gathering outbreaks, than
during community transmission.
It is helpful to monitor the testing rate as a measure of the coverage of surveillance - a minimum recommended rate is at least one
person tested per 1000 population per week. Testing should not be limited to specific populations (e.g. only those in urban settings
with high access to testing). Denominator data must be available at the level of disaggregation being assessed (e.g. district, province).
Some authorities may choose to track these indicators among individuals at greatest risk for severe disease and death.
After all available indicators are calculated, if the levels calculated based on each indicator are different, a qualitative review should
be undertaken to determine the final transmission classification. It is recommended that if data are not available (or reliable) for all
indicators, more weight should be given to the indicators considered more reliable in the local context. In many cases, indicators
listed higher in Table 2 may be more reliable than those lower in the table.
In places where indicator values are not reliable, but the system is stable, trends can be used as an alternative assessment. One
example would be a situation in which there is a very low testing rate, and many cases are likely missed, but the testing strategy is
not changed.
Additional indicators that can provide further evidence to help classify the level of transmission are listed in Table 3. These indicators
may not be readily available at the lowest administrative level of operations, however. They are therefore considered secondary to
the primary four indicators listed in Table 2. Furthermore, they may not directly reflect transmission or force of infection of SARSCoV-2 or may be more difficult to interpret and compare than those listed in Table 2. Thresholds are not presented for the secondary
indicators, due to a lack of available data, high local variability, or both.
As a last resort, where no indicator values are available, subjective assessment can be used, but this should be done over several
weeks to avoid influences from transient or anecdotal observations.
-8-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Table 2: Primary Epidemiological Indicators and Proposed Ranges to Assess the Level of COVID-19 Community
Transmission
Domain

Indicator

Description/Rationale

Major limitations

Level of community transmission
CT 1

CT 2

CT 3

CT 4

Hospitalization
Rate

New COVID19
hospitalizations
per 100 000
population per
week averaged
over a twoweek period

A subset of all incident
cases require
hospitalization; thus,
this is an indirect
indicator of incidence.
Unlikely to be subject to
surveillance policy
changes/differences.

May be influenced
by hospitalization
policy, e.g. if even
mild cases are
hospitalized for
isolation purposes.
Delayed measure
of incidence.

<5

5 - <10

10 <30

30+

Mortality

Number of
COVID-19
attributed
deaths per 100
000 population
per week
averaged over
a two-week
period

A subset of all incident
cases are fatal, and thus
this is an indirect
indicator of incidence.
Minimally influenced
by surveillance policy if
testing is
comprehensive.

Delayed measure
of incidence. At
low levels and in
small geographical
regions, can be
sensitive to minor
fluctuations (e.g.
one versus two
deaths).

<1

1-<2

2-<5

5+

Case Incidence

New confirmed
cases per 100
000 population
per week
averaged over
a two-week
period

Direct measure of
incidence

Heavily influenced
by surveillance
system
performance,
testing policy and
laboratory
capacity. At low
levels and in small
geographical
regions, can be
sensitive to minor
fluctuations in case
counts, particularly
due to batch
reporting.

<20

20 <50

50 <150

150+

Testing

Test positivity
proportion
from sentinel
sites averaged
over a twoweek period.

Not influenced by
surveillance capacity or
strategy. Minimally
influenced by testing
strategy or capacity.

May not be
representative of
the general
population if there
are only limited
sentinel sites. May
miss mild or
atypical cases if
testing criteria
require influenzalike presentation.

< 2%

2% - <
5%

5% <20%

20%+

Note: the thresholds in this table may be updated as additional data become available.
Trends in Transmission
In addition to calculating the category of transmission classification, it is also important to understand the direction of the trends of
contributing indicators (stable, decreasing or increasing) over several weeks. This can assist in determining whether measures
implemented are improving the epidemiological situation in the area, and for planning future changes, or putting in place anticipatory
changes, to public health measures based on a likely change in the transmission classification.

-9-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Table 3: Additional epidemiological indicators to assess level of COVID-19 Community Transmission*
Indicator

Description/Limitations

ICU proportional occupancy

The proportion of new ICU admissions attributed to COVID-19, out of all
ICU admissions for the same period (alternatively, proportion of current
ICU beds occupied by patients with COVID-19, out of all occupied ICU
beds)

Effective reproductive number (Rt)

The effective reproductive number during the previous one or more
epidemiological weeks. While this is a widely used indicator of
transmission, it requires familiarity with the various methods for calculation
and sufficiently reliable and timely data on incidence.2

Doubling time

The number of days required to double the total cumulative number of cases.
This is linked to Rt.

Proportion of unlinked cases amongst new
cases

This is defined as the proportion of cases not previously listed as contacts
(alternatively, the proportion not linked to known clusters/transmission
chains). It is a measure of the spread in the community beyond known
clusters. It is heavily influenced by case investigation and contact tracing
capacity.

Overall (non-sentinel) test positivity

This may be useful if there are limited sentinel sites. It may capture atypical
cases better than sentinel surveillance. This is heavily influenced by testing
strategy and capacity.

Influenza-like-illness (ILI) or Severe Acute
Respiratory Infection (SARI) trends

This is not directly indicative of COVID-19 cases, but sentinel surveillance
for ILI and SARI can also capture a proportion of COVID-19 cases, and
thus this is useful for monitoring trends for COVID-19. This measure may
be helpful where COVID-19-specific surveillance is not robust.

All-cause hospitalization rate trends

This is not directly indicative of COVID-19 hospitalizations, but, where
COVID-19 cases make up a substantial proportion of hospitalizations, this
can be useful for identifying trends in COVID-19 cases. These rates may
decline due to restricted service provision and other public health measures.
Trends must be analyzed in the context of other potential causes of changes
in hospitalization rates (e.g. concurrent influenza circulation). These trends
may be helpful where COVID-19-specific surveillance is not robust.

All-cause (excess) mortality trends

This measure is not directly indicative of COVID-19 cases/deaths, but where
COVID-19 deaths make up a substantial proportion of overall deaths, this can
be useful for identifying trends in COVID-19 cases. Trends must be analyzed
in the context of other potential causes of changes in mortality rates (e.g.
concurrent influenza circulation), and ideally compared with baseline data on
mortality to identify excess above expected (e.g. seasonal) fluctuations. While
this is a widely used indicator of transmission, it requires careful consideration
of the inherent biases in mortality estimation methods.3 These trends may be
helpful where COVID-19-specific surveillance is not robust.

*This list should not be considered exhaustive.

2. Health system and public health services capacity and performance
The capacity to respond to the extant epidemiologic situation of COVID-19 (i.e. the transmission classification) is a key
consideration in the decision to adapt PHSM. Clinical care and public health services are two key domains that reflect the ability of
a country to adapt and respond to the requirements of both the COVID-19 caseload and the burden of disease more generally.
Sufficient clinical care capacity is required to treat both inpatient and ambulatory cases of COVID-19 while ensuring that the health
system is not overwhelmed and can continue to treat the regular caseload of patients, particularly during seasonal peaks, such as the
influenza season, and at times of rapid or large increases in COVID-19 transmission. The public health response relies on the
capacity of the surveillance system to detect and respond to changes in COVID-19 transmission and focuses on key activities
including case detection, diagnostic testing and contact tracing. Each of the two domains (health services and public health) is
divided into two principal sub-domains, namely capacity (output indicators) and performance (outcome and impact indicators).
While this section is not aimed to be overly prescriptive, it provides quantitative thresholds (Table 4) to categorize response capacity
and performance into three categories: adequate, moderate and limited. It is important to note that capacity needs to be assessed in
the context of the current transmission classification. Response capacity that has been considered adequate may, under a higher
incidence scenario, be reduced to moderate or limited response capacity.

-10-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Assessing overall level of health system and public health services capacity and performance
To assess the overall capacity and performance of the health system and public health services, authorities should use the same
approach as outlined for transmission classification. This includes prioritizing those indicators that are available and reliable and
adjusting thresholds to local contexts and reliability of the data; interpreting changes to indicators in the context of changes to data
collection mechanisms; undertaking a qualitative review to determine the final health system capacity level if the levels calculated
based on each indicator are different; using trends instead of quantitative thresholds where data are not reliable but denominators
are stable; using subjective assessment as a last resort if no data are available; and observing trends in indicators to anticipate future
changes to the health system and public health services capacity and performance level. Additional indicators that can be used for
triangulation are provided in Table 5. Assessments should be updated biweekly.
Table 4: Primary Epidemiological Indicators and Proposed Ranges to Assess Level of COVID-19 Health system and
public health services capacity and performance
Domain

Indicator

Description/
Rationale

Major limitations

Capacity to respond
Adequate

Moderate

Limited

Clinical care
capacity

Proportion of
occupied
hospital beds

High morbidity and
mortality will occur if
there is insufficient
capacity to
hospitalize severe
cases. Should count
all hospitalizations,
not only COVID-19.

May be influenced by
hospitalization policy (e.g.
if all cases are isolated in
hospital), which does not
indicate true saturation of
hospital capacity.

<75%†

75-<90%†

90%+ †

Clinical care
performance

Case fatality
rate of
resolved (i.e.,
outcome
known)
hospitalized
cases

Overall impact
indicator of adequate
COVID-19 care.

Highly dependent on age
and various biases. 3 Must
take into account any
changes in case detection
or testing strategy.

Decreasin
g trend

Stable
trend

Increasing
trend

Public health
response
capacity

Number of
persons tested
per 1000
population per
week,
averaged over
a two-week
period

Without sufficient
testing, it is difficult
to appropriately
isolate and treat
cases.

Not all laboratories are
able to report individuals
tested; if possible, can
count number of new
rather than repeat tests;
otherwise can count
number of tests but this
may be misleading due to
repeat testing. Laboratories
not reporting location of
cases may mask disparities
in testing (e.g. among nonurban populations). If
using rapid diagnostic
tests, these should be used
according to guidance, and
thresholds may need to be
raised.

2+

1-<2

<1

Public health
response
performance

Proportion of
cases for
which an
investigation
has been
conducted
within 24
hours of
identification

This indicates that the
capacity to identify
transmission risks and
exposed contacts.
Where investigation
is not recorded
directly, can be
measured by proxy
indicator - proportion
of cases with contacts
listed.

May be difficult to obtain
timely data.

80%+

60-<80%

<60%

-11-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Domain

Public health
response
performance

Indicator

Support for /
Adherence to
PHSM

Description/
Rationale
Qualitative
assessment based on
observation, media
monitoring,
perception or
behaviour surveys,
hotlines, focus
groups, etc. Predictor
of effectiveness of
PHSM put in place; it
is important to
identify not only the
current status but any
barriers or enablers to
improvement.

Major limitations

May be highly variable
between sub-groups and
across individual PHSM.
Difficult to assess
objectively.

Capacity to respond
Adequate

Moderate

Limited

High
(nearly
universal
adherence
to most
PHSM).

Moderate
(modest
adherence
to most
PHSM, or
variable
adherence
across
individual
PHSM).

Low
(minimal
adherence
to most
PHSM).

Hospital occupancy routinely varies considerably between countries, and so baseline occupancy must be taken into
consideration.

†

Table 5: Additional Epidemiological Indicators to Assess Level of COVID-19 Health system and public health services
capacity and performance*
Indicator

Description/Limitations

Number of trained ICU staff per 10
000 population

This indicates sufficient clinical capacity to respond to cases most likely to lead to
mortality. This indicator may be more relevant when measured against population of
clinically vulnerablei persons, if data are available. This indicator is difficult to
measure. It is a necessary but insufficient measure of ability to provide intensive care.

Number of ICU beds per 10 000
clinically vulnerable populationi

Mortality from COVID-19 will be highest if capacity for intensive care is exceeded.
Strictly counting the number of ICU beds does not guarantee successful care if there is
inadequate staffing, equipment or supplies.

Proportion of occupied ICU beds

This indicator assesses sufficient clinical capacity to respond to cases most likely to
lead to mortality. It may not be useful in countries with very few ICU beds (can be
substituted with proportion of occupied hospital beds +/- oxygen in these situations);
if this indicator is very low, overall health system capacity should be considered
limited, regardless of adequate levels of other capacity indicators

Proportion of occupied beds with
access to oxygen supply

As oxygen is an important treatment for COVID-19 and sufficient capacity to provide
oxygen can be useful even in the absence of ICU capacity. This indicator may be
difficult to measure and may not be useful in countries with very low capacity.

Crude case fatality rate of COVID19

This is an overall impact indicator of adequate COVID-19 care. It is highly dependent
on age and other risk factors, and various reporting biases.3 Analysis of trends should
consider any changes in case detection or testing strategy. Countries are advised to
collect additional information on age, as this measure will be heavily affected by the
age structure of the population.

Number of contact tracers per 100
000 population [alternatively per
number of new cases in a week]

This indicates capacity to conduct sufficient contact tracing to interrupt transmission.
It is an input indicator which may not correlate well with actual contact tracing
outcomes. There is minimal evidence base for determining thresholds. This may be
difficult to accurately measure where contact tracing is done by persons other than
formally designated “contact tracers”.

Number of points of entry
surveillance officers per 100 000
daily travellers

This is a measure of the ability to successfully mitigate the risk of importation. It is a
poor indicator of actual internal domestic capacity; is minimally relevant during
widespread community transmission; and may be achieved when human resources are
inappropriately diverted from internal domestic use.

-12-

Annex: Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Indicator

Description/Limitations

Proportion of newly confirmed or
probable cases interviewed for
contact elicitation within 24 hours
of identification

This indicator measures the timeliness of contact listing, which shortens exposure to
potentially infected persons. A better metric of contact listing timeliness is the actual
proportion of contacts identified and traced/quarantined within 48 hours.

Proportion of contacts of new cases
who are monitored for 14 days (or
locally specified period)

This indicates that contacts are monitored until no longer at risk for becoming
secondary cases (linked to a particular source case). This indicator may be particularly
important for assessment of public health system performance in the
‘imported/sporadic’ and ‘clusters’ transmission scenarios. It can be spuriously inflated
by poor contact listing.

Proportion of identified cases
isolated within 24 hours of positive
test result (or determination as a
probable case)

This indicates that investigation and isolation of new cases is sufficiently rapid to
minimize the generation of secondary cases. This indicator may be particularly
important for assessment of public health system performance in the
Imported/Sporadic and Clusters transmission scenarios.

Time from symptom onset to case
confirmation

This measures the ability of the surveillance system to promptly detect, test and
confirm symptomatic cases. Individual components (i.e., time from symptom onset to
detection, detection to testing and test turnaround time can also be measured
independently.

Proportion of cases arising from
contact lists

This describes the extent to which new cases are already captured by and known to the
surveillance system through adequate case investigation. When this is low, it suggests
widespread existence of “hidden” chains of transmission and/or poor-quality case
investigation.

This list should not be considered exhaustive.
‘Clinically vulnerable’ in this context refers to individuals aged >60 years and/or with comorbidities that increase risk of serious
COVID-19 disease, including heart disease, asthma and diabetes.
*
i

References
1.

Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19. Geneva: World Health Organization;
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/critical-preparedness-readiness-and-response-actions-for-covid-19)

2.

Megan O’Driscoll, Carole Harry, Christl A Donnelly, Anne Cori, Ilaria Dorigatti, A comparative analysis of statistical
methods to estimate the reproduction number in emerging epidemics with implications for the current COVID-19
pandemic, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2020; ciaa1599, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1599

3.

Estimating mortality from COVID-19: Scientific brief. Geneva: World Health Organization;
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/333642.

WHO continues to monitor the situation closely for any changes that may affect this interim guidance. Should any factors change,
WHO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this interim guidance document will expire 2 years after the date of publication.

© World Health Organization 2020. Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/Adjusting_PH_measures/2020.2
-13-

