COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health
workers
Interim guidance
2 February 2021

Key points
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Health workers should continue to enjoy their right to decent, healthy and safe working conditions in
the context of COVID-19.
Primary prevention of COVID-19 among health workers should be based on risk assessment and
introduction of appropriate measures.
Other occupational risks amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic, including violence, harassment,
stigma, discrimination, heavy workload and prolonged use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
should be addressed.
Occupational health services, mental health and psychosocial support, adequate sanitation, hygiene and
rest facilities should be provided to all health workers.
Health-care facilities should have occupational health programmes in conjunction with programmes for
infection prevention and control.
Employers have the overall responsibility to ensure that all necessary preventive and protective
measures are taken to minimize occupational risks to health workers.
Health workers are responsible for following established rules for the protection of their health and
safety at work.

Introduction
This document is an update of the World Health Organization (WHO) interim guidance, Coronavirus disease (COVID19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key considerations for occupational safety
and health, from 18 March 2020 (1). This version, which is based on new and emerging evidence, provides guidance
on occupational health and safety measures for health workers and occupational health services in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. It also updates the rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work for health workers
according to the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
This document complements and should be used in conjunction with the following WHO interim guidance. Prevention,
identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19 from 30 October 2020, which
provides recommendations for post-exposure risk assessment and management of infections in health workers (2), and
Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response from 3 December 2020,
which contains strategic policy recommendations for health workforce planning, support and capacity-building (3).
This guidance was developed on the basis of a review of existing WHO and ILO guidance documents, rapid reviews of
evidence about occupational risks that have been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and expert opinion from an
independent international group of experts. It is intended for employers and health-facility managers, health workers
and their representatives, occupational health and safety experts, infection prevention and control experts in public and
private health facilities and policy-makers at national and subnational levels

-1-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Background
Health workers i may be exposed to occupational hazards that put them at risk of disease, injury and even death in the
context of the COVID-19 response. These occupational risks include (a) occupational infections with COVID-19; (b)
skin disorders and heat stress from prolonged use of PPE; (c) exposures to toxins because of increased use of
disinfectants; (d) psychological distress; (e) chronic fatigue; and (f) stigma, discrimination, physical and psychological
violence and harassment (4).
Mitigating these hazards and protecting the health, safety and well-being of health workers requires well-coordinated
and comprehensive measures for infection prevention and control, occupational health and safety, health workforce
management and mental health and psychosocial support (4). Insufficient occupational health and safety measures can
result in increased rates of work-related illness among health workers, high rates of absenteeism, reduced productivity
and diminished quality of care (5).

Occupational infections
Occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2
The WHO interim guidance Mask use in the context of COVID-19 from 1 December 2020 compiles the available
evidence on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (6). According to this evidence, SARSCoV-2 mainly spreads between people when an infected is in close contact with another person. The virus can spread
from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles ranging from larger ‘respiratory droplets’ to smaller
‘aerosols’ when the person coughs, sneezes, sings, breathes heavily or talks. Close range contact can result in inhalation
of, or inoculation with, the virus though the mouth, nose or eyes.
Aerosol transmission can occur in specific situations in which medical procedures that generate aerosols are performed.
There is inconclusive evidence about aerosol transmission in health-care settings in the absence of aerosol generating
procedures (6).
There is limited evidence of transmission through fomites (objects or materials that may be contaminated with viable
virus, such as utensils, furniture, stethoscopes or thermometers) in the immediate environment around an infected person.
Such transmission may occur through touching the fomites followed by touching the mouth, nose or eyes (6).
There is emerging evidence of transmission in settings outside of medical facilities, such as indoor, crowded, and
inadequately ventilated spaces, where infected persons spend long periods of time with others. This suggests the
possibility of aerosol transmission in addition to droplet and fomite transmission (6).
Health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can occur any time in health-care facilities and in the
community, during work-related travel to an area with local community transmission and on the way to and from the
workplace. A systematic review suggests that occupational risk for health workers can increase in certain clinical settings
or with suboptimal hand hygiene, long working hours, or improper or suboptimal use or non-availability of PPE (7).
Workplace risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2
The potential for health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can be determined by the likelihood of coming
into direct, indirect or close contact with a person infected with the virus. This includes direct physical contact or care,
contact with contaminated surfaces and objects, through aerosol-generating procedures on patients with COVID-19
without adequate personal protection, or working with infected people in indoor, crowded places with inadequate
ventilation (6). The risk of occupational exposure increases with the level of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2
(8).
Employers, in consultation with health workers and their representatives, and with support from experts in infection
prevention and control (IPC) and occupational health, should carry out and regularly update a workplace risk assessment
for SARS-CoV-2. The purpose is to determine the level of risk for potential occupational exposure related to different
jobs, work tasks and work settings; and to plan and implement adequate measures for risk prevention and mitigation
and for assessing the fitness for work, and return to work, of individual health workers (9).
Health workers are all people engaged in work actions whose primary intent is to improve health. This includes health service providers, such
as doctors, nurses, midwives, public health professionals, lab-, health- and medical and non-medical technicians, personal care workers,
community health workers, healers and some practitioners of traditional medicine. It also includes health management and support workers, such
as cleaners, drivers, hospital administrators, district health managers and social workers, and other occupational groups in health-related
activities. Health workers include not only those who work in acute care facilities but also those employed in long-term care, public health,
community-based care, social care and home care and other occupations in the health and social work sectors as defined by the International
Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), revision 4, section Q: Human health and social work activities.
i

-2-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

The following workplace risk levels may be useful for employers and occupational health services when carrying out
rapid risk assessments for potential occupational exposure ii to SARS-CoV-2 for different jobs or tasks (10).
1. Lower risk − jobs or tasks without frequent, close contact with the public or others and that do not require contact
with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (9).
2. Medium risk − jobs or tasks with close frequent contact with patients, visitors, suppliers and co-workers but that do
not require contact with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (8).
3. High risk − jobs or tasks with high potential for close contact with people who are known to be or suspected of
being infected with SARS-CoV-2 or contact with objects and surfaces possibly contaminated with the virus (9).
4. Very high risk − jobs and tasks with risk of exposure to aerosols containing SARS-CoV-2, in settings where aerosolgenerating procedures are regularly performed on patients with COVID-19 or working with infected people in
indoor, crowded places without adequate ventilation (6).
Levels of workplace risk, even in the same work setting, may vary based on health worker tasks and roles. Therefore, a
workplace risk assessment should be carried out for each specific setting, as well as for each role, task or set of tasks.
The risk assessment should lead to prevention and mitigation measures to avoid exposure based on the level of risk,
bearing in mind the local epidemiological situation, the specificity of the work setting and work tasks, the hierarchy of
controls and the level of adherence to IPC measures (11, 12). The above-mentioned workplace risk levels can also be
useful to identify priority groups as COVID-19 vaccine deployment is planned (13).
Table 1 gives examples of job tasks and measures for prevention and mitigation of health worker exposure to SARSCoV-2 based on risk level, in accordance with the WHO guidance and recommendations for IPC and occupational health
in the context of COVID-19 (6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15).
Table 1. Workplace risk levels, job tasks and corresponding measures for primary prevention and mitigation of
occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among health workers
Risk level

Examples of job tasks

Lower risk
(caution)

Administrative tasks that do not
involve contact with patients and
visitors or close contact with other
co-workers. For example,
telehealth services, remote
interviewing of suspected or
confirmed COVID-19 patients or
their contacts, working in
individual or low-density offices.

Sample prevention and mitigation measures iii
Health facilities:
•
•
•
•
•
•

organize remote work and teleservices, wherever possible
and appropriate;
provide natural or mechanical ventilation without
recirculation;
organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social
mixing and encourage workers to observe safe physical
distancing;
introduce measures preventing the sharing of work stations
and equipment;
establish flexible sick leave policies.

Workers:
•
•
•

stay home if unwell;
observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
use fabric masks in common areas and face-to-face
meetings.

ii In these risk levels, persons referred to as “known to be or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2” may include pre-symptomatic or
asymptomatic persons who may be infected but do not have obvious signs or symptoms.

For details see the following WHO interim guidance documents: Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the
context of COVID-19, 10 May 2020 (9); Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected
or confirmed, 29 June 2020 (11); Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during
severe shortages, 23 December 2020 (12); Clinical management of COVID-19, 27 May 2020 (14); COVID-19: Recommendations for heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities, 21 May 2020 (15); Mask use in the context of COVID-19, 1 December 2020 (6).
iii

-3-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Risk level
Medium
risk

Examples of job tasks
Jobs or tasks with close frequent
contact with patients, visitors,
suppliers and co-workers but that
do not require contact with people
known or suspected of being
infected with SARS-CoV-2. In
settings with known or suspected
community transmission of
SARS-CoV-2, this risk level may
apply to workers who have
frequent and close work-related
contact with other people within a
health-care facility or in the
community where safe physical
distance may be difficult to
maintain. In settings without
community transmission, this
scenario may include close
frequent contact with people
coming from areas with known or
suspected community
transmission.

Sample prevention and mitigation measures iii
Health facilities:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

consider alternatives to face-to-face outpatient visits using
telehealth services wherever feasible and appropriate;
provide sneeze screens, barriers, workplace modifications
and natural or mechanical ventilation without recirculation;
organize screening and triage for early recognition of
patients with suspected COVID-19 and rapid
implementation of source control measures;
organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
introduce measures to avoid crowding and social mixing,
such as restricting visitors and designating areas where
patients are not allowed;
encourage workers to observe safe physical distancing
when not wearing PPE (e.g. in break rooms and cafeterias);
provide IPC training and adequate PPE in sufficient
quantity and quality;
establish flexible sick leave policies.

Workers:
•
•
•

stay home if unwell;
observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
wear medical masks and other PPE according to their tasks
and apply standard precautions in providing patient care.

Patients, visitors and suppliers:
•
•
High risk

Clinical triage with in-person
interviewing of patients with signs
and symptoms of COVID-19;
cleaning areas for screening and
isolation; entering rooms or
isolation areas occupied by
patients with known or suspected
COVID-19; conducting a physical
examination and providing direct
care not involving aerosolgenerating procedures for patients
with known or suspected COVID19; manipulation of respiratory
samples; handling respiratory
secretions, saliva or waste from
COVID-19 patients;
transportation of people known or
suspected of having COVID-19
without physical separation
between the driver and the
passenger; cleaning between
transports of patients with
suspected COVID-19.

observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
in settings with community or cluster transmission, wear
medical or fabric masks.

Health facilities:
•
•
•
•
•
•

implement engineering, environmental and administrative
controls for IPC, and provide adequate PPE in sufficient
quantity and quality;
provide enhanced ventilation without recirculation, with
“clean to less clean” directional design for airflows;
organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social
mixing and restricting non-essential workers and visitors;
provide regular IPC training, including on the use of PPE;
establish flexible sick leave policies.

Workers and caregivers:
•
•
•

use PPE based on transmission-based precautions (medical
mask, gown, gloves, eye protection) and apply standard
precautions in providing patient care;
stay home if unwell;
observe hand and respiratory hygiene.

Patients, visitors and suppliers:
•
•

wear medical or fabric masks;
observe hand and respiratory hygiene.

-4-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Risk level

Examples of job tasks

Very high
risk

Work with COVID-19 patients
where aerosol-generating
procedures (e.g. tracheal
intubation, non-invasive
ventilation, tracheotomy,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
manual ventilation before
intubation, sputum induction,
bronchoscopy, autopsy
procedures, dental procedures that
use spray-generating equipment)
are frequently performed; work
with infected people in indoor,
crowded places without adequate
ventilation.

Sample prevention and mitigation measures iii
Health facilities:
•
•
•
•
•

implement engineering, environmental and administrative
controls for IPC and provide adequate PPE in sufficient
quantity and quality;
provide mechanical ventilation with high efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filters without recirculation;
introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social
mixing and for restricting access of non-essential workers
and visitors;
provide regular IPC training, and training in donning and
doffing PPE;
establish flexible sick leave policies.

Workers:
•
•
•

stay home if unwell;
observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
use PPE (respirator N95 or FFP2 or FFP3, gown, gloves,
eye protection, apron) and apply standard precautions in
providing patient care.

IPC: infection prevention and control; PPE: personal protective equipment.

Transparent and timely dissemination of information on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in health facilities and in the
community should be an integral part of primary prevention in all risk categories.
Some health workers may be at higher risk of developing severe COVID-19 illness because of older age, pre-existing
medical conditions or pregnancy (14). Such workers should not be required to carry out tasks with medium, high or very
high risk levels in accordance with WHO recommendations (3).
Some health workers, especially those who are students, volunteers, interns, newly-graduated or are returning to the
workplace after time away, may be at greater individual risk because they are unfamiliar with IPC procedures or make
errors while practising newly acquired skills. Appropriate task delegation and role assignment should be considered,
with provisions for regular supportive supervision in line with WHO and ILO recommendations (3, 16).
All health facilities should consult with experts to assess the effectiveness of their ventilation systems. Any decision on
whether to use natural, hybrid (mixed-mode) or mechanical ventilation should consider: the climate, including prevalent
wind direction; the floor plan; and, the need for and cost of the ventilation system (15). Aerosol-generating procedures
should be performed in rooms with appropriate special air exchange capacities and considerations (11).
Health workers should be encouraged to report if they have had occupational or non-occupational exposure to COVID19 without adequate protection. Such exposures should be investigated, assessed and managed case by case using the
WHO recommended protocol (17). Follow-up actions for managing the infection and return to work should be decided
in line with WHO recommendations for prevention, identification and management of health worker infections (2).
Other occupational infections
While providing care to COVID-19 patients and delivering essential health services, health workers may be exposed to
other infectious hazards, such as bloodborne pathogens and tuberculosis. Therefore, the prevention and control of
occupational infections among health workers requires a comprehensive approach, bearing in mind the hierarchy of
controls and close collaboration between occupational health services and IPC programmes staffed with trained
professionals (2, 18, 19). Box 1 sets out the hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections.

-5-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Box 1. Hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections
Measures for the prevention of occupational infections should aim to align with the hierarchy of controls commonly
used for preventing exposures to occupational hazards. The hierarchy of controls gives priority to highly effective
measures, such as protection of all workers through engineering and administrative control, instead of relying only
on measures dependent on individual behaviour, such as adherence to personal protection (20).
a) Hazard elimination. Eliminating exposure to the infectious hazard in the working environment is the most
effective control. This may be through working remotely, provision of telehealth services from individual
offices or teleconferencing.
b) Engineering/environmental controls. If the hazard cannot be eliminated from the workplace, measures
should be taken to avoid or reduce the spread of the pathogen and its concentration in the work
environment. For example, through adapted structural design conducive to patient flow and spatial
separation for isolating patients, and design and repurposing of wards (11, 21). Adequate ventilation,
sanitation practices and infrastructure, ‘touch-free’ technology, sneeze guards and barriers, safer needle
devices and safe health-care waste management are other critical elements (22, 23).
c) Administrative controls. Measures may need to be taken to change the way people work such as: restricting
workplace access to essential workers with specific training and skills for protection; ensuring appropriate
working hours; rostering and, where possible, avoiding workers being shifted from high to low transmission
settings.
Other helpful controls include the addition of surge personnel to meet work demands; rest breaks; time off
between shifts; appropriate task delegation; supportive supervision; ‘just-in-time’ and refresher training on
IPC practices; procedures for monitoring performance and giving feedback (24); paid sick and holiday
leave; and, policies for workers to stay home if unwell, or in self-quarantine and self-isolation, without loss
of income.
d) Optimal use of PPE. Measures should be in place to protect individual health workers from exposure,
including provision of adequate and appropriately fitted PPE based on risk assessment, the type of
procedure to be performed and the risk of infection during a procedure. Appropriate training and
monitoring on proper use and disposal of PPE is also important (12). The PPE used for protection against
occupational infections should comply with standard technical specifications (25).
In all patient care settings, standard precautions should be applied to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and
other pathogens from both recognized and unrecognized sources in accordance with WHO recommendations (26).
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers should continue to receive recommended vaccinations as specified in
the national immunization programme and WHO recommendations (27). WHO also recommends that health workers
be encouraged to take a seasonal influenza vaccine (28).

Prolonged use of PPE
In principle, PPE is intended to be used for short periods of time when the exposure to hazard cannot be avoided or
otherwise controlled. In the context of COVID-19, heavy workload, patient flows and shortages of PPE may require
health workers to wear PPE for extended periods of time.
Research suggests that prolonged use of gloves and frequent hand hygiene may cause or aggravate existing hand eczema
(29). If a health worker has a latex allergy, use of non-latex or nitrile gloves is advised. Frequent application of
moisturizing creams is a good practice to decrease hand irritation. Products containing petroleum can damage the
integrity of latex gloves and should be avoided for skin care (30). Health workers with sustained rashes or inflammatory
skin symptoms should be referred to medical care.
There is evidence that prolonged use of PPE for respiratory and eye protection (masks, respirators and goggles) can also
cause skin damage: itching, rash, acne, pressure injury, contact dermatitis, urticaria and aggravation of pre-existing skin
diseases (31). To decrease the risk of skin damage, it is a good practice to provide health workers with properly fitted
PPE, to avoid sustained friction or pressure on the same site; to apply moisturizers or gel before wearing facial protective
equipment to lubricate and reduce friction between skin and masks or goggles; and to avoid using over-tight goggles,
which can damage the skin and generate fogging (31).
-6-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Prolonged use of full PPE (gowns, masks, head coverings, coveralls) traps heat and sweat, limits evaporative cooling of
the body and can lead to heat stress (heat rash, muscle cramps, fainting, exhaustion, breakdown of skeletal muscle and
heat stroke) (32). Coveralls, double layering of gowns, shoe protection, or hoods that cover the head and neck such as
those used in the context of filovirus disease outbreaks (e.g. Ebola virus), are not required when caring for patients with
COVID-19 (12).
WHO and the ILO recommend that health workers at risk of heat stress should be advised to monitor for symptoms of
heat-related illness, including monitoring the colour and volume of urine output (33). The time spent in full PPE should
be limited and rest should be arranged in a cool area. Sufficient safe and cool drinking-water should be provided to all
health workers.

Use of disinfectants
The increased use of disinfectants in health facilities and in public places may cause toxic effects among health workers,
cleaners and sanitation workers. Nasal and eye irritation, chest tightness, wheezing, difficulty breathing, and skin
irritation may result. Disinfectant solutions must be prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations in well-ventilated areas, avoiding mixing of different disinfectants.
Health workers involved in the preparation and application of disinfectants should be evaluated for medical
contraindications, trained in the safe use of disinfectants, provided with adequate PPE and instructed in its proper use.
WHO does not recommend spraying individuals with disinfectants (such as in a tunnel, cabinet or chamber) under any
circumstances (22).

Workload, work time and work organization
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers may be working long hours with heavier workloads and insufficient
time for rest and recuperation. These demands can result in chronic fatigue and lack of energy, with decreased alertness,
coordination and efficiency; increased reaction time; impaired cognition and emotional blunting or mood changes.
Strategic health-workforce planning, support and capacity-building are required to ensure safe staffing levels, fair
allocation of workloads, and management of working time and work organization according to recommendations in the
WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response,
from 3 December 2020 (3).
In the case of a declared public emergency, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, exceptions to the provisions on normal
working hours should be authorized only temporarily in accordance with ILO recommendations (34). Measures should
be taken for the optimal organization of working hours, shifts and rests, as practically feasible, based on the local
situation (Box 2).

-7-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Box 2. WHO and ILO recommendations for prevention of fatigue during an emergency situation
Shift lengths. Five 8-hour shifts, or four 10-hour shifts, per week are usually tolerable. Longer shifts represent a risk
factor for fatigue. Depending on the workload, 12-hour days may require more frequent interspersed rest days.
During the evening and night, shorter shifts (e.g. eight hours) are better tolerated than longer shifts. Fatigue is
intensified by night work because of night-time drowsiness and inadequate daytime sleep (33). Preference should be
given to shift rotation in a forward direction (morning to afternoon to night), bearing in mind workers’ preferences
and local conditions (35).
Workload. Balance shifts of lighter and heavier work tasks. Examine work demands with respect to shift length.
Twelve-hour shifts are more tolerable for ‘lighter’ tasks (e.g. desk work). Shorter work shifts help counteract
fatigue from highly intense work, physical exertion, extreme environments or exposure to other health or safety
hazards (33).
Rest and recuperation. Establish policies regarding duration of working hours and rest breaks (e.g. at least 10
consecutive hours per day of protected time off to obtain 7−8 hours of sleep, and 48 hours off after 14
consecutive days of work). Providing frequent brief rest breaks (e.g. every 1−2 hours) during demanding work is
more effective against fatigue than a few longer breaks. Allow longer breaks for meals. Plan one or two full days of
rest to follow five consecutive 8-hour shifts or four 10-hour shifts. Consider two rest days after three consecutive
12-hour shifts (33).
As necessary, and if possible, provide accommodation for health workers during emergency operations with access
to food services or ready-to-eat meals, sanitary facilities and recreational opportunities, while maintaining physical
distancing and other public health measures to prevent COVID-19 (33).

Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma
Incidents of violence and harassment iv against health workers have been increasing during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The most widespread risk factors for workplace violence in the health sector include stress and fatigue, long patient
waiting times, crowding, the burden of transmitting negative prognoses, COVID-19-specific prevention and control
measures (such as placing individuals in quarantine or isolation facilities), contact tracing or not allowing access to the
bodies of deceased loved ones. These can all lead to additional tensions and violence (36).
Because of their proximity to potentially infected people, health workers may also be seen as infection threats within
the community and thus face stigma and discrimination. Health workers are at risk of violence and harassment at the
workplace as well as on their way to and from work and in the community (37). Wearing work clothes, or other signs
that make health workers easy to identify, may increase the risk of experiencing stigma, discrimination or violence and
harassment by the public (37).
Workplace violence and harassment has been shown to have negative effects on the organization of health services and
retainment of staff, the mental and physical well-being of health practitioners and the quality of health-care delivery. A
systematic review (38) found that health workers in service delivery roles, such as nurses, first responders, emergency
room staff and physicians, and those working long hours or night shifts, are at higher risk. Male providers are slightly
more likely to become victims of physical violence, while female providers have a higher risk of exposure to sexual
harassment and sexual violence. Health workers from ethnic minorities and other minority groups might be particularly
at risk.
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma against health workers should be prevented and eliminated as much as
possible. Some countries have introduced specific legislation, for example by criminalizing such acts and providing
regulatory protection for health workers, to prevent and eliminate violence and harassment and retaliation against health
workers (39). National governments and local authorities can adopt community-engagement and communication
initiatives and behavioural standards, to prevent stigmatization of health workers at the workplace and in the community
thereby promoting public respect and recognition of the role of health workers (40). Box 3 sets out international
recommendations for addressing this issue.

The Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190) defines “violence and harassment” in the world of work as “a range of
unacceptable behaviours and practices, or threats thereof, whether a single occurrence or repeated, that aim at, result in, or are likely to result in
physical, psychological, sexual or economic harm, and includes gender-based violence and harassment”. The Convention also establishes the
responsibilities of national authorities and employers respectively.
iv

-8-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Box 3. International recommendations for addressing workplace violence and harassment in the health
sector (41, 42)
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Design, implement and monitor a workplace policy to prevent and combat violence, harassment,
discrimination and stigma with the participation of workers and their representatives, and ensure that all
staff, including management, are aware of it and abide by it.
Establish procedures to prohibit discrimination and harassment and promote fair treatment of workers.
Provide security briefings and personnel in high-risk areas.
Undertake initiatives to raise awareness and provide training on violence and harassment.
Provide timely and accurate information to staff and patients to reduce uncertainty and distress.
Streamline patient flow and avoid crowding and waiting times.
Ensure safe access to and from the workplace and easily-identified emergency exits.
Provide alarm systems (e.g. panic buttons, telephone, beeper, short-wave radio) where risk is anticipated.
Have protocols in place for reporting, investigating and responding to incidents of violence, stigma and
discrimination in a blame-free environment.
Introduce measures to protect complainants, victims, witnesses and whistle-blowers against victimization or
retaliation and ensure confidentiality is protected.
Provide confidential assistance, counselling and support to victims of violence, harassment and stigma.
Regularly assess the risk of violence and harassment in consultation with workers and their representatives.
Avoid wearing uniforms or other clinical attire while commuting to work and when visiting public places,
households or the community for non-professional reasons.

Mental health and psychosocial support
In addition to the pressures mentioned above, a systematic review (43) found that health workers’ mental health and
well-being can be affected in the context of COVID-19. This can be caused by contact with affected patients, perceived
impediments to doing their jobs, insufficient organizational support, forced redeployment to jobs with higher levels of
risk, lack of confidence in protective measures and working as a nurse.
Personal risk factors for health workers’ mental health include lower levels of education, inadequate training, less
clinical experience, working as a part-time employee, increased time in quarantine, social isolation, having children at
home, lower household income, younger age, female sex, comorbid physical health conditions and the impact of the
pandemic on their personal lifestyle.
Lower perceived personal self-efficacy and a history of psychological distress, mental health disorders or substance
abuse, are further risk factors. These risks make health workers vulnerable to common mental health conditions
including anxiety, depression and insomnia (33, 43). Mental health issues can contribute to reduced performance,
absence, staff resignations or higher turnover, a reduction in efficiency and increased possibility of human error, which
may pose a threat to both health workers and patient safety (44).
The WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic
response, from 3 December 2020, specifies interventions to support health workers’ mental health issues at the
individual level (3). According to international recommendations by WHO and others, the following additional measures
should be considered for protecting mental health in the workplace.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Implement surveillance measures to detect critical incidents and mitigate their impact on the mental health of
health workers (33, 43).
Ensure that quality communication and accurate information updates are provided to all health workers, and
rotate workers from higher-stress to lower-stress functions (44).
Partner inexperienced workers with experienced colleagues and ensure that outreach personnel enter the
community in pairs (45).
Ensure availability of and facilitate access to confidential mental health and psychosocial support services for
health workers, including remotely-provided or on-site services (12).
Provide mechanisms for early and confidential identification and management of anxiety, depression and other
mental health conditions, and initiate psychosocial support strategies and first-line interventions (12).
Promote a mental health prevention culture among health workers and health managers (12).
Ensure health workers who develop mental health conditions and seek help can return to their work without
stigma or discrimination (45).
-9-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Sanitation, hygiene and rest facilities
Functioning hand hygiene facilities should be present for all health workers at all points of care: in designated areas
where PPE is put on or taken off; in toilets and rooms for personal and menstrual hygiene, and where health-care waste
is handled. Ensure availability of hand-washing facilities with clean running water and hand hygiene products (soap,
single-use clean towels). Alcohol-based hand rubs containing 60−80% alcohol should be available at all points of care.
Access to rest and relaxation rooms, safe drinking-water, toilets, supplies for personal and menstrual hygiene, and food
and rest opportunities should all be available during work shifts (46). These areas should allow for safe physical
distancing and adequate ventilation (3).
Designated rooms should be set aside for health workers providing toilets and space for personal and menstrual hygiene;
these should be separate from those used by patients and visitors. There should be a bin for disposal of waste products,
or an area for washing re-usable materials, and a space for women to wash themselves with privacy (3).
There should be daily cleaning protocols to ensure workplace, workstations, equipment and facilities are clean and tidy
and a system for disposing of bin contents and disinfecting the bins (34).
In some situations, the provision of temporary accommodation (hotels/motels, trailers or tents) may be needed between
shifts for rest and hygiene. Food service, childcare and recreational opportunities can facilitate personnel availability,
decrease exposure to infection in families and the community, and alleviate stress and fatigue (17).
Facilities should be provided at the workplace for health workers to change into and out of work clothing, so they do
not need to wear it when commuting (46). Professional laundering of work clothes worn at the bedside, that come into
contact with the patient or patient environment, should be organized by the health facility (47).

Occupational health services
Every health-care facility should have an occupational health programme, as articulated in the WHO/ILO global
framework for occupational health programmes for health workers, and a designated and appropriately trained focal
point for occupational health and safety (48). Large health-care facilities should have a labour-management committee
for health and safety at work and an occupational health service with essential preventive functions (49).
In the context of COVID-19, occupational health service focal points should collaborate closely with IPC programmes
to institute IPC policies and procedures in accordance with the WHO interim guidance, Prevention, identification and
management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19, from 30 October 2020 (2). In addition, focal points
and occupational health services should:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

carry out regular workplace risk assessments for exposure to other risks for health and safety at work amplified
by the COVID-19 pandemic and assess the effectiveness of preventive measures;
provide instructions and training to workers on how to work in a healthy and safe way, including prevention of
violence and stigma, safe use of disinfectants and protection of mental health and psychological well-being;
advise on additional measures for control and mitigation of other physical, chemical, ergonomic and radiation
hazards based on risk assessment;
identify priority groups of health workers for COVID-19 vaccination and other immunizations based on
workplace risk assessment and medical conditions;
organize immunization campaigns and recording of vaccination status;
organize health surveillance of workers engaged in jobs and tasks with an elevated risk of exposure to SARSCoV-2 and other occupational hazards;
monitor reporting and participate in the investigation of cases of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and accidental
exposure to other pathogens, needlesticks and other sharps, accidents and incidents of violence and harassment
and develop measures for prevention;
advise on the procurement of safer technical devices and adequate PPE;
organize the monitoring of health workers for COVID-19 symptoms, testing and provision of expert advice to
health workers on issues related to exposure and their health;
ensure workers’ representatives are consulted on all aspects of occupational safety and health associated with
their work to enhance cooperation between management and workers;
collaborate with facility focal points for infection prevention and control, patient safety and human resources;
advise on the provision of suitable facilities for health workers to shower and change from work clothing to day
wear.

-10-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

Health workers should be evaluated confidentially by medical professionals for fitness for duty to carry out certain jobs
and tasks, and for any impairment that may pose increased risk of illness or injury from exposures at work. In the context
of COVID-19, certain workers need special consideration. These include:
•
•
•

older health workers and those with pre-existing medical conditions or who are pregnant and may be at higher
risk of developing serious illness;
workers with mental health conditions that can deteriorate from additional distress, such as tending to a high
number of severely ill and dying patients;
workers with increased workload, prolonged hours or concern for their own or a family member’s health.

Occupational health services should organize a health assessment for any worker who self-identifies as fitting into one
of the above categories. An assessment should also be done in the following situations: a change of job, work tasks or
work setting; before workers are assigned roles with COVID-19 patients; and on resumption of work after a prolonged
absence for health reasons. Periodic assessments, particularly for the development of skin and mental health disorders
and other work-related health problems, are advised for all staff.

Duties, rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work
Employer responsibilities
According to international labour standards, employers have the overall responsibility for ensuring that all necessary
preventive and protective measures are taken to minimize occupational risks (50). Keeping this in mind, in the context
of COVID-19, employers of health workers should:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

consult with health workers and their representatives on the occupational safety and health aspects of their work
and the risks of exposure and adopt adequate preventive and mitigation measures, avoiding the creation of new
sources of risk;
ensure timely access to information and transparent dialogue between health workers and employers, including
sharing of the most recent information on clinical protocols, guidelines, measures and decisions to ensure
effective implementation, as well as on workplace situations that expose health workers to risks;
provide information, instruction and training on occupational safety and health, including refresher training in
IPC, and the correct use, donning, doffing and disposal of PPE;
provide adequate IPC and PPE supplies in sufficient quantity and quality and at no cost to any worker;
maintain supply chain management of PPE supplies;
provide personnel with timely technical updates on COVID-19 and appropriate tools to assess, triage, test and
treat patients, and share IPC information with patients and the public;
provide appropriate security measures as needed for personal safety;
ensure a blame-free environment in which health workers can report on hazardous, stigmatizing or violent
incidents related to work and adopt measures for immediate follow-up, including support to victims;
advise health workers on health self-assessment, symptom reporting and policies for staying home if unwell or
in quarantine;
maintain appropriate working hours with breaks and rest periods in accordance with national law;
allow health workers to exercise the right to remove themselves from a work situation that they have reasonable
justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to their life or health, and protect health workers
exercising this right from any undue consequences;
notify the competent authority of cases of occupational injuries and diseases, in accordance with national law;
consider providing access to mental health support and counselling resources;
promote cooperation between management and health workers and their representatives;
ensure health workers are covered with employment injury benefits in line with national law.

Whenever two or more employers or entities engage in activities simultaneously in one work setting, they should
collaborate on occupational safety and health, without prejudice to the responsibility of each for the health and safety
of its employees (51).
Health worker rights and responsibilities
Health workers are entitled to decent work, which entails dignity, equality, a fair income and safe working conditions.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the right to safe workplaces, health workers have duties and
responsibilities regarding the protection of health and safety at work under international labour standards (52), and to
follow WHO recommendations for patient safety (53). These include:

-11-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

following established occupational safety and health procedures, avoiding exposing themselves or others to
health and safety risks and participating in employer-provided occupational safety and health training;
using provided protocols to assess, triage and treat patients;
swiftly following established public health reporting procedures for suspected and confirmed cases;
treating patients with respect and compassion, conferring dignity and maintaining patient confidentiality;
providing or reinforcing accurate IPC and public health information to patients and the public;
putting on, using, taking off and disposing of PPE correctly;
self-monitoring for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, and reporting any unprotected occupational and nonoccupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 to the focal point for occupational health or the occupational health
service, and self-quarantining;
advising the occupational health service if they are experiencing signs of undue stress or mental health
challenges that may require supportive interventions;
reporting to their immediate supervisor any situation they have reasonable justification to believe presents an
imminent and serious danger to life or health.

Responsibilities of national authorities
Besides their duties and responsibilities as employers in publicly provided health services, national authorities should
ensure that all health workers involved in the COVID-19 response, regardless of their employment status and mode of
practice, have access to coverage for medical care and sickness benefits, including for testing and treatment of COVID19, quarantine and isolation in line with national laws (52).
National authorities must ensure that health workers, especially those at medium, high and very high risk of infection,
regardless of their mode of practice, have early access to COVID-19 vaccination programmes (13). They should also
ensure that all health workers are covered by schemes for employment injury benefits according to national regulations
(54). National authorities should ensure and facilitate access to medical care for health workers infected with COVID19.
COVID-19, if contracted as a result of work, could be considered as a work or employment injury (54). Such cases
should be investigated and reported to the public authority responsible for managing employment injury benefits
according to national regulations. Countries should consider updating their lists of occupational diseases, exposure
criteria and reporting in the context of COVID-19 (55).
Health workers who are infected by COVID-19 as a result of their work – and in case the infection is considered an
occupational disease or injury in line with national law – should be entitled to health care, and to the extent that they are
incapacitated for work, cash benefits or compensation. Dependent family members of health workers who die from
COVID-19 contracted in the course of work-related activities, should be entitled to cash benefits or compensation as
well as to a funeral grant or benefit (52).

References
1. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key
considerations for occupational safety and health. Interim guidance, 18 March 2020. Geneva: World Health
Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-outbreak-rights-roles-andresponsibilities-of-health-workers-including-key-considerations-for-occupational-safety-and-health, accessed
20 November 2020).
2. Prevention, identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19. Interim
guidance, 30 October 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665336265, accessed 20 November 2020).
3. Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Interim guidance,
3 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/healthworkforce-policy-and-management-in-the-context-of-the-covid-19-pandemic-response, accessed 10 December
2020).
4. WHO calls for healthy, safe and decent working conditions for all health workers, amidst COVID-19 pandemic.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 28 April 2020 (https://www.who.int/news/item/28-04-2020-who-calls-forhealthy-safe-and-decent-working-conditions-for-all-health-workers-amidst-covid-19-pandemic, accessed 20
November 2020).

-12-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

5. ILO Policy Brief on COVID-19. Pillar 3: Protecting workers in the workplace. Geneva: International Labour
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/impacts-and-responses/WCMS_739049/lang-en/index.htm, accessed 20 November 2020).
6. Mask use in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 1 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337199, accessed 20 December 2020).
7. Chou R, Dana T, Buckley DI, Selph S, Fu Rongwei, Totten AM. Epidemiology of and risk factors for coronavirus
infection in health care workers: A living rapid review. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Jul 21;173(2):120-136.
https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1632. Epub 2020 May 5. PMID: 32369541; PMCID: PMC7240841.
8. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 4 November 2020.
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/critical-preparedness-readiness-andresponse-actions-for-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
9. Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the context of COVID-19. Annex to:
Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 10 May 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-public-health-and-socialmeasures-in-the-workplace-in-the-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
10. Guidance on preparing workplaces for COVID-19. Washington DC: Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor; 2020 (https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf, accessed
20 November 2020).
11. Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected or
confirmed. Interim guidance, 29 June 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-2020.4 accessed 20 November 2020).
12. Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during
severe shortages. Interim guidance, 23 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/rational-use-of-personal-protective-equipment-for-coronavirus-disease(covid-19)-and-considerations-during-severe-shortages, accessed 29 December 2020).
13. Guidance on developing a national deployment and vaccination plan for COVID-19 vaccines. Interim guidance,
16 November 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/336603/WHO-2019-nCoV-Vaccine_deployment-2020.1eng.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
14. Clinical management of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 27 May 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/clinical-management-of-severe-acute-respiratory-infection-when-novelcoronavirus-(ncov)-infection-is-suspected, accessed 20 November 2020).
15. COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities. Washington
DC: Pan American Health Organization; 21 May 2020 (https://www.paho.org/en/documents/covid-19recommendations-heating-ventilation-and-air-conditioning-health-care-facilities, accessed 20 November 2020).
16. ILO sectoral brief: COVID-19 and the health sector. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 11 April 2020
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/briefingnote/wcms_741655.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
17. Risk assessment and management of exposure of health care workers in the context of COVID-19. Interim
guidance, 19 March 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331496,
accessed 20 November 2020).
18. Minimum requirements for infection prevention and control programmes. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2019 (https://www.who.int/infection-prevention/publications/MinReq-Manual_2019.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20
November 2020).
19. Infection prevention and control health-care facility response for COVID-19: A module from the suite of health
service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 2020.
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-IPC-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
20. Liberati EG, Peerally MF, Dixon-Woods M. Learning from high risk industries may not be straightforward: a
qualitative study of the hierarchy of risk controls approach in healthcare. International Journal for Quality in
Health Care. 2018 Feb;30(1):39-43. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzx163
-13-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

21. Severe acute respiratory infections treatment centre: practical manual to set up and manage a SARI treatment
centre and a SARI screening facility in health care facilities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331603, accessed 20 November 2020).
22. Cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 16 May 2020.
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/cleaning-and-disinfection-ofenvironmental-surfaces-inthe-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
23. Ensuring a safe environment for patients and staff in COVID-19 health-care facilities: A module from the suite of
health service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October
2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-Safe_environment-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
24. Administrative controls to guarantee implementation of infection prevention and control measures in the context
of COVID-19. Washington DC: Pan American Health Organization; 18 June 2020
(https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/52389, accessed 20 November 2020).
25. Technical specifications of personal protective equipment for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 13 November 2020.
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVPPE_specifications-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
26. Infection control standard precautions in health care: aide memoire. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006
(https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/4EPR_AM2.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
27. Table 4: Summary of WHO position papers – Immunization of health care workers. Geneva: World Health
Organization; September 2020 (https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/Immunization_routine_table4.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
28. How to implement seasonal influenza vaccination of health workers. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/325906/9789241515597-eng.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 November
2020).
29. MacGibeny MA, Wassef C. Preventing adverse cutaneous reactions from amplified hygiene practices during the
COVID-19 pandemic: how dermatologists can help through anticipatory guidance. Arch Dermatol Res. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-020-02086-x
30. Yan Y, Chen H, Chen L, Cheng B, Diao P, Dong L, et al. Consensus of Chinese experts on protection of skin and
mucous membrane barrier for health-care workers fighting against coronavirus disease 2019. Dermatologic
Therapy. 2020 Jul;33(4):e13310. https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.13310.
31. Gefen A, Ousey K. Update to device-related pressure ulcers: SECURE prevention. COVID-19, face masks and
skin damage. Journal of Wound Care. 2020;29(5). https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2020.29.5.245.
32. Jacklitsch B, Williams WJ, Musolin K, Coca A, Kim J-H, Turner N. NIOSH criteria for a recommended standard.
Occupational exposure to heat and hot environments. Revised criteria 2016. Cincinnati, OH, USA: Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH); 2016 (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2016-106/pdfs/2016106.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2016106, accessed 20 November 2020).
33. Occupational safety and health in public health emergencies: a manual for protecting health workers and
responders. Geneva: World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2018
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/occupational-safety-and-health-in-public-health-emergencies-a-manualfor-protecting-health-workers-and-responders, accessed 20 November 2020).
34. Guidelines on decent work in public emergency services. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2019
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/--sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_626551.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
35. Health services. Decent working time for nursing personnel: Critical for worker well-being and quality care:
policy brief. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/publication/wcms_655277.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
36. Forgione Paola. New patterns of violence against healthcare in the covid-19 pandemic. BMJ Opinion. 15 May
2020. (https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/15/new-patterns-of-violence-against-healthcare-in-the-covid-19pandemic/, accessed 20 November 2020).

-14-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

37. Attacks on health care in the context of COVID-19. In WHO newsroom [website]. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/attacks-on-health-care-in-the-contextof-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
38. Liu J, Gan Y, Jiang H, Li L, Dwyer R, Lu K, et al. Prevalence of workplace violence against healthcare workers: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2019 Dec;76(12):927-937. PMID: 31611310.
39. Safe and healthy working environments free from violence and harassment. Geneva: International Labour
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/--safework/documents/publication/wcms_751832.pdf, accessed 20 December 2020).
40. Social Stigma associated with COVID-19. A guide to preventing and addressing social stigma. Geneva:
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, United Nations Children’s Fund and World
Health Organization; 24 February 2020
(https://www.unicef.org/media/65931/file/Social%20stigma%20associated%20with%20the%20coronavirus%20di
sease%202019%20(COVID-19).pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
41. Framework guidelines for addressing workplace violence in the health sector. Geneva: International Labour
Office, International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization, Public Services International; 2002
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/--sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_160908.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
42. C190 – Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No.190). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: International
Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C190, accessed
20 December 2020).
43. Kisely S, Warren N, McMahon L, Dalais C, Henry I, Siskind D. Occurrence, prevention, and management of the
psychological effects of emerging virus outbreaks on healthcare workers: rapid review and meta-analysis. BMJ
2020;369:m1642. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1642
44. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 18 March 2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/mental-healthconsiderations.pdf?sfvrsn=6d3578af_10, accessed 20 November 2020).
45. Addressing mental health and psychosocial aspects of COVID-19 outbreak: interim briefing note, version 1.5.
Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee; February 2020
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/202011/IASC%20Interim%20Briefing%20Note%20on%20COVID19%20Outbreak%20Readiness%20and%20Response%20Operations%20-%20MHPSS_3.pdf, accessed 20
November 2020).
46. Water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Interim
guidance, 29 July 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-WASH-2020.4, accessed 20 November 2020).
47. Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, Mayer J, Silvia Munoz-Price L, Murthy R, et al. Expert guidance: Healthcare
personnel attire in non-operating-room settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014 Feb;35(2):107-121.
https://doi.org/10.1086/675066.
48. Caring for those who care. National programmes for occupational health for health workers. Policy brief. Geneva:
World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2020
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/caring-for-those-who-care, accessed 20 November 2020).
49. C161 − Occupational Health Services Convention, 1985 (No. 161). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva:
International Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C161, accessed
20 November 2020).
50. C155 − Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva:
International Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C155, accessed
20 November 2020).
51. R164 − Occupational Safety and Health Recommendation, 1981 (No. 164). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva:
International Labour Organization
-15-

COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance

(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R164, accessed
20 November 2020).
52. ILO Standards and COVID-19 (coronavirus). FAQ. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 29 May 2020
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/--normes/documents/genericdocument/wcms_739937.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
53. Health worker safety: a priority for patient safety. Charter: World Patient Safety Day, 17 September 2020.
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/world-patient-safety-day/healthworker-safety-charter-wpsd-17-september-2020-3-1.pdf?sfvrsn=2cb6752d_2, accessed 20 November 2020).
54. C121 – Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 [Schedule I amended in 1980] (No.121). In: Normlex
[website]. Geneva: International Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C121, accessed
24 January 2021).
55. ILO List of Occupational Diseases (revised 2010). Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2010
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/--safework/documents/publication/wcms_125137.pdf, accessed 24 January 2021).

Acknowledgements
The following experts participated in the development of this document.
WHO Secretariat: Rola Al-Emam, Benedetta Allegranzi, Yonah (Eric) Amster, Gwen Brachman, Alessandro
Cassini, Giorgio Cometto, Shalini Desai, Neelam Dhingra-Kumar, Ivan D. Ivanov, Dorota Jarosinska, Catherine Kane,
Berit Kieselbach, Aiysha Malik, Guy Mbayo, Madison Moon, Maria Neira, Lesley Onyon, Gene Peralta, Julietta
Rodriguez-Guzman, Alice Simniceanu, Victoria Willet.
ILO: Magdalena Bober, Halim Hamzaoui, Maren Hopfe, Ursula Kulke, Franklin Muchiri, Joaquim Pintado Nunes,
Christiane Wiskow.
External Guideline Development Group: Gehad Abo El-Lata, Cairo University, Egypt; Baba Aye, Public Services
International, France; Claudio Colosio, University of Milano, Italy; John Conly, University of Calgary, Canada;
Samuel Harvey, Black Dog Institute, Australia; Maria Clara Padoveze, University of São Paulo, Brazil; Fiona Potter,
Institution of Occupational Safety and Health, United Kingdom; Annalee Yassi, University of British Columbia,
Canada; Min Zhang, Peking Union Medical College, China.
WHO and the ILO continue to monitor the situation closely. Should any factors change that may affect this interim
guidance, WHO and the ILO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this document will expire 2 years after the date of
publication.

© World Health Organization and International Labour Organization, 2021
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/HCW_advice/2021.1

-16-

