COVID-19 and Food Safety: Guidance for competent
authorities responsible for national food safety control
systems
Interim guidance
22 April 2020
Background

The challenges facing national competent authorities arise
from:

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic presents an exceptional
and unprecedented challenge for competent authorities a with
responsibilities for national food safety control systems b to
continue conducting routine functions and activities in
accordance with national regulations and international
recommendations. In many countries, competent authority
staff are largely working from home, teleworking being the
normal practice, and all face-to-face meetings cancelled or
rescheduled as teleconferences. It is challenging to maintain,
without interruption, routine activities such as the inspection
of food business operations, certifying exports, control of
imported foods, monitoring and surveillance of the safety of
the food supply chain, sampling and analysis of food,
managing food incidents, providing advice on food safety and
food regulations for the food industry, and communicating on
food safety issues with the public.

•
•

•
•
•

implementing contingency plans;
reduced capacity to maintain a fully functioning
food safety inspection programme resulting from the
reallocation of staff to national COVID-19
emergency response teams, staff working from
home, and staff illness and self-isolation;
reduced food testing capacity of food laboratories
reassigned to COVID-19 clinical testing;
increased risk to the integrity of the food supply
chain from food fraud;
need to respond to an increasing number of queries
and questions from Ministers, the food industry,
consumers, and the media.

Competent authorities have a critical role to play during this
pandemic in working with all sectors of the food industry so
that producers and processors can continue to operate
effectively and keep safe food supply lines open.

To preserve the integrity of the national food safety control
system and to support international trade and the food supply
chain, each competent authority will need to prioritize
critically important services during the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic. These may include introducing temporary
suspensions of low-risk control activities that do not
immediately affect the supply of safe food. Temporarily
suspending low-risk control activities will allow authorities
to continue to safeguard the health and safety of their staff
while refocusing efforts in areas of higher risk and towards
activities that are critical to the safety of food. Depending on
national priorities, some competent authorities may decide to
prioritize selected activities, for example, inspection of highrisk food businesses, export certification, import control
services, food incident management or investigation of food
complaints. It is important that competent authorities
continue to monitor developments regarding the COVID-19
pandemic and respond by making the necessary adjustments
to their work programmes and continue to deliver critical
services that preserve the integrity of their food safety
systems.

This guidance aims to address some key issues, namely, how
to ensure the effectiveness of a reduced food safety inspection
programme in mitigation of risk; and temporary measures that
can be introduced to contain widespread food safety risks and
reduce serious disruption to national food safety programmes.

Multi-agency cooperation and contingency
planning
All competent authorities should have emergency response or
contingency plans in place following FAO/WHO guidance1
and be able to put them in action. Competent authority
contingency plans should include details of the roles and
responsibilities of the central, regional, and local competent
authorities and mechanisms for cooperation and collaboration
during times of crisis. Contingency plans should include
details of how to prioritize the delivery of essential services;
the organisation of operational teams for information
management, communication, risk assessment and risk

For the purpose of these guidelines the term Competent
Authority means the official government organisation
having jurisdiction over the National Food Safety Control
System (as defined in the Codex Alimentarius e.g. CAC/GL
71-2009)

The National Food Safety Control System is described in
the Codex Guidelines for the Validation of Food Safety
Control Measures (CAC/GL 69-2008)

a

b

-1-

COVID-19 and Food Safety: Guidance for competent authorities responsible for national food safety control systems: interim guidance

management, and food incident management; the scaling up
of robust IT systems to facilitate working from home,
teleworking, and on-line conferencing.

heavily on imported ingredients. With international transport
often dramatically reduced, these businesses may have
delayed or interrupted supply chains that may pose food
safety concerns and could demand increased inspection and
controls. Similarly, new suppliers may need to be rapidly
identified by food businesses without going through the full
supplier approval programme, which may put the integrity of
products at risk.

Cooperation and collaboration between all relevant national
agencies are essential components of an effective, whole-ofgovernment response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The need
for cooperation between public health and food safety
authorities has never been more urgent.

Some food businesses will expand production as a result of
increased demand and will recruit temporary staff. Food
safety authorities will need to ensure that temporary staff are
supervised and adequately trained.

Maintaining a functioning national food safety
inspection programme

Temporary measures

As a consequence of restricting the movement of people, the
capacity of competent authorities to deploy suitable staff for
inspecting food businesses and other food control activities
can be seriously impaired. For example, food safety
inspection requiring the physical presence of control staff in
food premises may no longer be feasible. It may no longer be
possible to test food samples taken during an inspection
because of reduced capacity in food testing laboratories. The
key issue for competent authorities is to ensure compliance
with food legislation in those categories of food premises that
pose the greatest risk. Many food businesses are introducing
new biosecurity measures to limit the entry of external
personnel, which may extend to food inspectors. However,
food safety inspectors have a right to enter unhindered any
premises where they have reasonable grounds to believe that
food processing activities are conducted, for the purpose of
verifying compliance and preventing non-compliance with
food regulations.

Examples of food safety controls where temporary measures
may need to be introduced under exceptional circumstances
include:
•

•
•

•

A risk-based approach
National food safety inspection programmes should be
organised on a risk basis where food businesses are ranked to
determine the frequency of inspection. A risk profile of each
food business for inspection purposes should be based on the
nature and extent of the food business, taking into account the
type of food handled, processed and distributed; the methods
of processing (cooked food, ready-to-eat products); scale of
the operation, and possible at-risk groups among consumers
of the products. Issues to take into account in deciding on risk
categorisation of food businesses include the history of
compliance or non-compliance with food legislation,
confidence in the implementation of the food businesses’
Food Safety Management System (FSMS), and verification
records. This risk-based food safety inspection approach can
identify those high-risk food premises that require inspection.
It may be necessary to temporarily suspend inspections of
low- to medium-risk food premises for the duration of this
pandemic.

•

temporary use of electronic data exchange instead of
original official paper certificates and official
attestations that should accompany consignments of
food producing animals;
temporary authorization of accredited private food
laboratories to conduct testing and analysis under
the supervision of the competent authority;
the electronic submission by food businesses of the
results of their own checks to demonstrate that inhouse controls are still functioning (selfcertification);
if food safety authorities do not have access to a
sufficient number of suitably qualified and
experienced staff, private sector bodies and
independent qualified professionals may be
temporarily authorized to perform food inspection
functions provided that they are supervised by the
authority, they act impartially and are free from any
conflict of interest regarding the functions they carry
out; and
flexibility on some aspects of food labelling (e.g.,
date marking) to avoid food waste while still
ensuring food safety.

Staff protection
Where inspections of food businesses need to continue,
measures should be taken to avoid serious health risks for
staff of the competent authorities without jeopardizing the
prevention of food safety risks. Food inspectors should be
trained in procedures to minimize the transmission of SARSCoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19 disease).3 Food
inspectors will need to ensure that they are free of symptoms
of COVID-19; they will need to practice physical distancing
while in the food premises, frequent hand washing, including
before and after entering the food premises, and good
coughing/sneezing etiquette. Food inspectors will also
require PPE such as disposable overalls, overshoes,
facemasks, gloves, and hairnets, which will need to be
changed between inspections.4

One of the critical areas where food inspections will need to
continue is in abattoirs including oversight of ante- and postmortem controls. Food inspectors in such premises will
require Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) and will need
to be aware of the importance of physical distancing,
handwashing, sanitizing, and disinfection especially if
production conditions change for example due to increased
production line speeds.

Temporary suspension of control programmes
Some monitoring and surveillance programmes that are
routinely carried out by competent authorities could be
temporarily suspended during this pandemic without

Another critical group of businesses where inspection may
need to be strengthened are those where production relies

-2-

COVID-19 and Food Safety: Guidance for competent authorities responsible for national food safety control systems: interim guidance

jeopardizing the safety of foods, the health of the consumer,
or international trade. Examples of such activities are annual
residues monitoring programmes that aim to ensure
compliance with contaminants regulations. There will be a
reduced need for testing of food samples arising from the fact
that a smaller number of food inspections will take place, with
the closure of many bars, cafes and restaurants. In countries
with hygiene rating schemes or “scores on doors”
programmes for restaurants, these may be automatically
extended for limited periods without the need to carry out an
inspection.

operators are advised to discuss the situation with their
inspector before placing products or ingredients with
temporary non-compliant labels on the market.

Food laboratories: testing and analysis
A particular challenge for competent authorities is the
reduced capacity in public sector laboratories to test foods, as
these are reallocated to testing of COVID-19 clinical samples.
A minimum capacity in microbiological and chemical safety
needs to be maintained to support food inspections of highrisk businesses, for dealing with consumer complaints and
food incidents, and for the investigation and management of
outbreaks of foodborne illness. This may require the
temporary authorization of private accredited food
laboratories to carry out testing as part of the national food
safety control programme. However, the competent authority
must ensure the validity and reliability of the testing results.
In addition, public health disease surveillance systems may
have a reduced capacity to identify human cases of foodborne
illness but it is essential that a minimum national capability is
maintained.

Reduced sampling and testing of food will make it all the
more important for national competent authorities to have
access to and share information via global systems such as the
International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN).5
Food businesses should be obliged to report to competent
authorities when they are aware of receiving or placing unsafe
food on the market.
Food regulations – temporary exemptions may be
required
Competent authorities need to liaise closely with the food
businesses to assess whether temporary amendments or
adjustments are required to food legislation due to the
challenges posed by COVID-19 to ensure the supply of food
is not compromised. Competent authorities will need to
assess whether flexibility can be applied when enforcing
technical aspects of food regulations, while ensuring the
safety of food.

Food laboratories will need to introduce measures to reduce
the risk of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the laboratory
environment. These measures will involve training laboratory
workers to recognize symptoms of COVID-19, following
physical distancing principles, frequent handwashing and
sanitizing and disinfection, and coughing/sneezing etiquette.
Laboratory staff should familiarize themselves with the
biosafety guidance related to COVID-19 from WHO.4

Food labelling is one particularly challenging area where
certain ingredients may be unavailable or where food
packaging materials are no longer supplied due to
interruptions in transport or imports. Where a food business
uses an approved ingredient that has the same technical
function as a previously available ingredient, a temporary
authorization may be justified provided that safety concerns,
such as allergen labelling and traceability requirements are
taken into account. There can be no relaxation of regulations
on unauthorized health claims and the principle that food
labelling should not mislead the consumer.

To achieve physical distancing, it may be necessary to reduce
laboratory staff density through split-shift working and
communication via intercoms when staff are working alone
in a small laboratory space when it is not possible to remain
more than one metre apart. Arrangements need to be in place
for physical distancing during shift handovers. Working
schedules should be arranged so that essential work will
continue in the event of a laboratory worker becoming
infected.

Food businesses that would have supplied the catering sector
may now need to find alternative markets for products.
Similarly, restaurants that have purchased food products or
ingredients may need to find markets for such products they
no longer require to produce restaurant food. Temporary
authorization to sell such products should be provided in
these circumstances with the provision for use of temporary
over-labels with a derogation on nutrition labelling
(unauthorized use of health claims is prohibited) and in
compliance with existing date marking and storage
instructions.

In may be necessary to temporarily suspend a food
laboratory’s accreditation to ISO 17025 if the volume of
samples for a particular test is reduced. This may result from
the suspension of annual residues monitoring programmes.

Risk to the integrity of the food supply
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in food supply chains
being disrupted with some products, ingredients, or materials
being unavailable or in short supply. In the rush to identify
new suppliers, food businesses may focus less attention on
the integrity of the supply chain, thereby opening new
opportunities for food fraud. As competent authorities
introduce temporary reductions in food controls with a
suspension or cancellation of inspections and food sampling,
fraudsters may take advantage of such opportunities. In
addition to the reduction in official controls, there is also
likely to be a reduction in private sector audits and checks of
certification and accreditation schemes. During this pandemic,
competent authorities should investigate reported incidences

Competent authorities should apply some flexibility when
enforcing the technical aspects of food regulations; however,
food safety cannot be compromised, and key information
must be provided so that consumers can make informed
choices. Some flexibility on labelling compliance can be
considered once there is no risk to the consumer and critical
information such as allergen declaration, durability (shelf
life), traceability and any special storage conditions or
conditions of use can be addressed or mitigated by overlabelling with this critical information. Food business

-3-

COVID-19 and Food Safety: Guidance for competent authorities responsible for national food safety control systems: interim guidance

involving food fraud and work closely with food businesses
to assess the vulnerability of supply chains and ensuring
control plans are implemented.

Communication

Food businesses are legally required to produce and market
safe and authentic food. In addition to their FSMS, food
businesses should consider introducing risk-based
vulnerability assessment systems to mitigate against food
fraud. Competent authorities need to highlight the increased
risks of food fraud.

With the rapid evolution of the pandemic comes a growing
need to ensure that accurate and credible information is
accessible to food businesses and the wider public.
Competent authorities need to have a robust communications
strategy in place to prevent rumours and misinformation and
to provide up-to-date reliable information to all stakeholders.
It is important for the competent authorities to reiterate to the
public that while there are no reported cases of COVID-19
transmitted through the consumption of food and that it is
very unlikely for COVID-19 to be transmitted through food,
hygiene recommendations provided by health authorities to
avoid the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 should also be
applied by consumers when shopping or handling food.
Recommendations and messages published by WHO can be
adapted and disseminated for national contexts.

As citizens are confined to their homes, an increasing number
of consumers are turning to e-commerce and online food
retail shopping. Many people are now buying food online
from a multitude of e-commerce sites that have sprung up
since the beginning of this pandemic. The risk of food fraud
in the e-commerce sector can be high. To protect consumers
from misleading e-commerce practices, competent
authorities need to strengthen food controls and oversight of
internet sales. As some competent authorities do not have
legislation and strong control programmes regulating ecommerce, sharing data and information through INFOSAN
would assist in reducing the instance of unsafe and fraudulent
foods traded online.

Competent authorities should provide advice for food
businesses regarding prevention of possible transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 in the food chain and how to protect the
workers (see the WHO guidelines8). They may also need to
provide advice to operators who change the nature of their
businesses, for instance, from restaurants to food-togo/takeaway sales, or voluntary groups that establish new
food operations.

Staff training
Staff working in competent authorities, particularly those
conducting inspections in food businesses, need to be aware
of the symptoms of COVID-19.6,7 Staff must be able to
recognize symptoms early so that they can seek appropriate
medical care, self-report, and exclude themselves from work,7
minimizing the risk of infecting fellow workers. Staff may
require refresher training courses in the basic principles of
food hygiene3 and operational procedures for conducting
inspections of food businesses, particularly on the use of PPE
and ensuring that they do not contribute to contaminating the
work environment.

As understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic evolves,
competent authorities will need to review and update their
messaging accordingly. As well as updating food businesses
and consumers, it is important to ensure that relevant
Ministries are continuously briefed on the situation to
facilitate a whole-of-government approach to managing this
crisis.

Staff in competent authorities who interface with the public
on helplines or via social media channels must keep up-todate with the most recent information and advice being
passed to the public. A dedicated communications team,
backed up by public health and food safety specialists, is
required to prepare and disseminate advice for consumers on
how to protect themselves and their families. Each competent
authority should establish a dedicated COVID-19 page on
their website with up-to-date factual advice and links to
trusted websites of organizations such as WHO, FAO, and
OIE.

WHO and FAO continue to monitor the situation closely for
any changes that may affect this interim guidance. Should any
factors change, an update will be issued. Otherwise, this
interim guidance document will expire 2 years after the date
of publication.

References

Competent authorities need to ensure that they have a system
in place for the public to make a complaint and for authorities
to respond on a timely basis to such complaints. Channels for
communicating complaints can be via a helpline or a
dedicated webpage on the authority’s website.
Food businesses also need to keep up-to-date with food
regulations and advice on any additional measures that must
be implemented to ensure a safe and adequate food supply.
Competent authority staff who interact with food businesses
need to be trained and fully briefed to address concerns and
answer questions.

-4-

1.

FAO/WHO. 2010. FAO/WHO framework for
developing national food safety emergency
response plans
https://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/emerg
ency_response/en/

2.

WHO. 2020. Modes of transmission of virus
causing COVID-19: implications for IPC
precaution recommendations, Scientific brief.
https://www.who.int/newsroom/commentaries/detail/modes-of-transmissionof-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipcprecaution-recommendations

COVID-19 and Food Safety: Guidance for competent authorities responsible for national food safety control systems: interim guidance

3.

FAO/WHO. 2009. Codex Alimentarius. Food
hygiene: Basic texts
http://www.fao.org/3/a1552e/a1552e00.pdf

4.

WHO. 2020. Laboratory biosafety guidance related
to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/laboratorybiosafety-guidance-related-to-coronavirus-disease2019-(covid-19)

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/nov
el-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public
7. Q&A
on
coronaviruses
(COVID-19)
https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/qa-coronaviruses
8.

5. Responding to food safety emergencies
(INFOSAN)
https://www.who.int/activities/responding-tofood-safety-emergencies-infosan
6. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for
the public

FAO/WHO, 2020. COVID-19 and Food Safety:
Guidance for Food Businesses
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/covid-19and-food-safety-guidance-for-food-businesses

© World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2020. Some rights
reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 FAO
licence (CC BY-NC- SA 3.0 IGO; https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/).

WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/Food_Safety_authorities/2020.1

-5-

